

Asma Jilani ---- Vs---- Govt. of the Punjab

Important Case decided By SC.

PLD 1972 Supreme Court 139

Present: Hamoodur Rahman, C. J., Muhammad Yaqub Ali, Sajjad Ahmad, Waheeduddin Ahmad and
Salahuddin Ahmed, JJ

Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1972

Miss ASMA JILANI‑Appellant

Versus

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PUNJAB AND ANOTHER----- Respondents

(On appeal from the judgment and order of Lahore High Court, Lahore, dated the 15th January 1972,
in Writ Petition No. 1538 of 1971).

Criminal Appeal No. K‑2 of 1972

Mst. ZARINA GAUHAR‑Appellant

Versus

THE PROVINCE OF SIND AND 2 OTHERS‑Respondents

(On appeal from the judgment and order of the High Court of Sind & Baluchistan, Karachi, dated the
18th February 1972, in Constitutional Petition No. 40 of 1972).

Criminal Appeals Nos. 19 and K‑2 of 1972, decided on 20th April 1972.

(a) Constitution--------

------‑Annulment and abrogation of Constitution by a successful Military revolution‑Principle laid down
in Dosso's case [P L D 1958 S C (Pak.) 533] that "where a Constitution and the national legal order
under it is disrupted by an abrupt political change not within the contemplation of the Constitution,
then such a change is a revolution and its legal effect is not only the destruction of the Constitution
but also the validity of the national legal order, irrespective of how or by whom such a change is
brought about"‑Held, wholly unsustainable and cannot be treated as good law either on the principle
of stare decisis or otherwise‑Martial Law‑Nature and scope of Proclamation of Martial Law does not by
itself involve abrogation of civil law and functioning of civil authorities and certainly does not vest the
Commander of the Armed Forces with the power of abrogating the fundamental law of the
country‑Commander of Armed Forces ; bound by his oath to defend the Constitution‑Doctrine of "legal
positivism" propounded by Hans Kelsen‑‑Examined‑[State v. Dosso P L D 1958 S C (Pak.) 533
overruled].

The precise question before the Supreme Court was whether the High Courts had jurisdiction under
Article 98 of the Constitu*tion of Pakistan (1962) to enquire into the validity of detention under the
Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971 in view of the bar created by the provisions of the Jurisdiction
of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order, 1969. The further question was whether the doctrine enunciated
in the case of State v. Dosso P L D 1958 S C (Pak.) 533 was correct. The successive mano*euvrings
for usurpation of power under the Pseudonym of Martial Law, it was urged, were neither justified nor
valid nor had even reached the effectiveness to merit the legal recognition that was given to them in
the case of State v. Dosso.

Held, that in laying down a novel juristic principle of such far‑reaching importance the Chief Justice in
the case of State v. Dosso proceeded on the basis of certain assumptions, namely :‑

(1) "That the basic doctrines of legal positivism", which he was accepting, were such firmly and

universally accepted doctrines that "the whole science of modern jurisprudence" rested upon them ;

(2) that any "abrupt political change not within the contem*plation of the Constitution" constitutes a
revolution, no matter bow temporary or transitory the change, if no one has taken any step to oppose
it ; and

(3) that the rule of international law with regard to the recognition of States can determine the
validity also of the States' internal sovereignty.

These assumptions were not justified. Kelsen's theory was, by no means, a universally accepted
theory nor was it a theory which could claim to have become a basic doctrine of the science of modern
jurisprudence, nor did Kelsen ever attempt to formulate any theory which "favours totalitarianism".
Kelsen was only trying to lay down a pure theory of law as a rule of normative science consisting of
"an aggregate or system of norms". He was propounding a theory of law as a "mere jurists'
proposition about law". He was not attempting to lay down any legal norm or legal norms which are
"the daily concerns of Judges, legal practitioners or administrators". Kelsen in his attempt to evolve a
pure science of law as distinguished from a natural science attached the greatest importance to
keeping law and might apart. He did not lay down the proposition that the command of the person in
autho*rity is a source of law. Kelsen's attempt to justify the principle of effectiveness from the
standpoint of international law cannot also be justified, for, it assumes "the primacy of international
law over national law." In doing so he has overlooked that for the purposes of international law the
legal person is the State and not the community and that in international law there is no "legal order"
as such. The recog*nition of a State under international law has nothing to do with the internal
sovereignty of the State, and this kind of recogni*tion of a State must not be confused with the
recognition of the Head of a State or Government of a State. An individual does not become the Head
of a State through the recognition of other States but through the municipal law of his own State. The
question of recognition of a Government from the point of view of international law becomes
important only when a change in the form of Government also involves a break in the legal continuity
of the State, or where the question arises as to whether the new Government has a reasonable
expectancy of permanence so as to be able to claim to represent the State.

The observations of the Chief Justice in Dosso's case are not correct that upon the principles of
international law if the territory and the people remain substantially the same there is "no change in
the corpus or international entity of the State and the revolutionary Government and the new State
are, accord*ing to international law, the legitimate Government and the valid Constitution of the
State". This proposition does not find support from any principle or international law. Accord*ing to
Oppenheim's view as propounded in his book on Inter*national Law if the revolutionary Government is
ineffective and or has no "reasonable expectancy of permanence" and/or does not "enjoy the
acquiescence of the population", then the international community may well refuse to recognise it,
even though its territorial integrity remains unchanged and its people remain substantially the same.
The criticism therefore, is true that the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court not only misapplied the
doctrine of Hans Kelsen, but also fell into error in thinking that it was a generally accepted doctrine of
modern jurisprudence. Even the disciples of Kelsen have hesitated to go as far as Kelsen had gone.

In any event, if a grund‑norm is necessary, Pakistan need not have to look to the Western legal
theorists to discover it. Pakistan's own grund‑norm is enshrined in its own doctrine that the legal
sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the authority exercisable by
the people within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust. This is an immut*able and unalterable
norm which was clearly accepted in the Objectives Resolution passed by the Constituent Assembly of
Pakistan on the 7th of March 1949. This has not been abrogated by any one so far, nor has this been
departed or deviated from by any regime, military or civil. Indeed, it cannot be, for, !t is one of the
fundamental principles enshrined in the Holy Quran:

Say, 'O Allah, Lord of sovereignty. Thou givest sovereignty to whomsoever Thou pleasest ; and Thou
takest a Nay sovereignty from whomsoever Thou pleasest. Thou exaltest whomsoever Thou pleaaest
and Thou abasest whomsoever Thou pleasest.‑Holy Quran, Pt. 3, Chap. III, A1 'Imran, Ay. 27‑The
basic con*cept underlying this unalterable principle of sovereignty is that the entire body politic
becomes a trustee for the discharge of sovereign functions. Since in a complex society every citizen

cannot personally participate in the performance of the trust, the body politic appoints State
functionaries to discharge these functions on its behalf and for its benefit, and has the right to remove
the ‑ functionary so appointed by it if he goes against the law of the legal sovereign, or commits any
other breach of trust or fails to dis*charge his obligations under a trust. The functional Head of the
State is chosen by the community and has to be assisted by a Council, which must hold its meetings
in public view and remain accountable to public. It is under this system that the Government becomes
a Government of laws and not of men, for no one is above the law. It is this that led Von Hammer, a
renowned orientalist, to remark that under the Islamic system "the law rules through the utterance of
justice, and the power of the Governor carries out the utterance of it.

The principle enunciated in Dosso's case, therefore, is wholly unsustainable, and it cannot be treated
as good law either on the principle of stare decisis or even otherwise.

Now to judge the validity of the events that took place on and from the 24th of March 1969. Oar the
24th of March 1969, Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of Pakistan, wrote a
letter to the Commander‑in‑Chief of the army expressing his profound regret for coming to the
conclu*sion that "all civil administration and constitutional authority in the country has become
ineffective" and admitting after reciting the unhappy state of events that had taken place in the
country earlier, that "it is beyond the capacity of the civil Government to deal with the present
complex situation, and the defence forces must step in." In these circumstances, he thought that
there was no option left for him but "to step aside and leave it to the defence forces of Pakistan, which
today represent the only effective and legal instrument, to take over full control of the affairs of the
country", and finally called upon the Commander‑in‑Chief to do the needful. This was follow*ed by a
Broadcast over the Radio network at 7‑15 p.m., of the 25th of March 1969. There was nothing either
in this letter or in this broadcast to show that he was appointing General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan
as his successor‑in‑office or was giving him any authority to abrogate the Constitution which he had
himself given to the country in 1962. Both these merely called upon the Commander‑in‑Chief of the
army to discharge his legal and constitutional responsibility not only to defend the country against
external aggression but also to save it from internal disorder and chaos. He did not even proclaim
Martial Law. Nevertheless, the Commander‑in‑ Chief on the very same day. namely, the 25th of March
1969, on his own proclaimed Martial Law throughout the length and breadth of Pakistan and assumed
the powers of the Chief Martial Law Administrator. He also abrogated the Constitu*tion, dissolved the
National and Provincial Assemblies and declared that all persons holding office as President, members
.of the President's Council, Ministers, Governors of Provinces and members of their Council of
Ministers shall cease to hold office with immediate effect. Existing laws and Courts were, ‑however,
preserved with the proviso that no writ or other order shall be issued against the Chief Martial Law
Administrator or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction under the authority of the Chief Martial
Law Administrator.

It is clear that under the Constitution of 1962, Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan had no power to
hand over power to anybody. Under Article 12 of the Constitution he could resign his office by writing
under his hand addressed to the Speaker of the National Assembly and then under Article 16 as soon
as the office of President fell vacant the Speaker of the National Assembly had to take over as the
acting President of the Country and an election had to be held within a period of 90 days to fill the
vacancy. Under Article 30 the President could also proclaim an emergency if the security or economic
life of Pakistan was threatened by internal disturbances beyond the power of a Provincial Government
to control and may be for the present purposes that he could also proclaim Martial Law if the situation
was not controllable by the civil administration. It is difficult, however, to appreciate under what
authority a Military Comman*der could proclaim Martial Law.

Martial Law, in the present times in England, has acquired various senses. In its original sense ft is
perhaps now only identi*fiable in the law relating to the enforcement of discipline in the forces at
home and abroad. In this sense this branch of Martial Law is now better known as "military law" and is
in time of peace enforced under various statutes, such as the Army Act, the Navy Act and the Air
Force Act. It derives its autho*rity from these statutes passed by the civil law‑making bodies. In
International Law Martial Law means the powers of a military commander in war time in enemy
territory as part of the jus belli. In this sense as the Duke of Wellington once said in the House of
Lords it is "neither more nor less than the will of the General who commands the army".

We must distinguish clearly between Martial Law as a machinery for the enforcement of internal order

and Martial Law as a system of military rule of a conquered or invaded alien territory. Martial Law of
the first category is normally brought in by a proclamation issued under the authority of the civil
Government and it can displace the civil Government only where a situation has arisen in which it has
become impossible for the civil Courts and other civil authorities to function. The Imposition of Martial
Law does not of its own force require the closing of the civil Courts or the abrogation of the authority
of the civil Government. The maxim inter armes teges silent applies in the municipal field only where
a situation has arisen in which tit has become impossible for the Courts to function, for, on the other
hand, it is an equally well‑established principle that where the civil Courts are sitting and civil
authorities are functioning the establishment of Martial Law cannot be justified. The validity of Martial
Law is, in this sense, always a judicial ques*tion, for, the Courts have always claimed and have in fact
exercised the right to say whether the necessity for the imposi*tion of Martial Law in this limited
common law sense existed.

From the examination of the various authorities on the subject one is driven to the conclusion that the
Proclamation of Martial Law does not by itself involve the abrogation of the civil law and the
functioning of the civil authorities and certainly does not vest the Commander of the Armed Forces
with the power of abrogating the fundamental law of the country. It would be paradoxical indeed if
such a result could flow from the invocation in the aid of a State of an agency set up and maintained
by the State itself for its own protection from external invasion and internal disorder. If the argument
is valid that the proclamation of the Martial Law by itself leads to the complete destruction of the legal
order, then the armed forces do not assist the State in suppressing disorder but actually create further
disorder, by disrupting the entire legal order of the State. It is, therefore, not correct to say that the
proclama*tion of Martial Law by itself must necessarily give the Com*mander of the armed forces the
power to abrogate the Consti*tution, which he is bound by his oath to defend.

Per Yaqoob Ali, J.‑However, effective the Government of a usurper may be, it does not within the
National Legal Order acquire legitimacy unless the Courts recognize the Government as de jure.
International law is not concerned with these considera*tions. If a rebel Government has succeeded in
gaining effective control over people and territory the other States may recognize it. But will the same
rule apply to the municipal Courts. East Pakistan today provides a classic example of a successful
revolu*tion which destroyed the National Legal Order and became a new law‑creating fact. East
Pakistan has declared its self‑independence and became a separate State under the name of Bangla
Desh. Pakistan claims that East Pakistan is a part of Pakistan, but a. large number of States have
already recognized it as an* independent State. New Courts and Government services have been
constituted in Bangla Desh which do not operate under the Legal Order of Pakistan. On these facts if a
dispute arises involving the determination whether the new Government of East Pakistan is de jure,
will the municipal Courts of West Pakistan confer recognition on it, because a victorious revolution is a
legal method of changing the Constitution and the new order has become efficacious as the individuals
whose behaviour the new order regulates actually behave by and large in conformity with new order.
The answer is obvious. While under International law, East Pakistan has become an independent
State, the municipal Courts of Pakistan will not confer recogni*tion on it or act upon the legal order
set up by the rebel Government. Yahya Khan's Government, therefore, remained de facto and not de
jure up to 20th December 1971, when he stepped aside.

Kelsen invests revolutionary Government with legal authority on the basis of a pre-supposed norm
that the victorious revolution and successful coup d'etat are law‑creating facts. This is in the realm of
a theory and not a part of the national legal order of any State. No municipal Court will, therefore, rely
on it as a rule. It is a statement of law by Mr. Kelsen to which a large number of jurists have taken
exception. What Kelsen has said about the legitimacy of norm and legal authority of a revolutionary
Government must be read separately and not mixed up. While revolution may destroy the existing
national legal order because after the change the reality of the State has, disappeared from behind
that order, it does not follow that the legal order, which replaces it, is the expression of the superior
will of one or more revolutionaries who staged victorious revolution or successful coup d'etat. This is
explained by Kelsen himself in the remark, that "the efficacy of the entire legal order is a necessary
condition for the validity of every single norm of the order. A conditio sine qua non, but not a conditio
per quam. The efficacy of the total legal order is a condition, but not the reason for the validity of its
constituent norm. These norms are valid not because the total order is efficacious, but because they
are created in a constitutional way." So, after a change is brought by a revolu*tion or coup d'etat, the
State must have Constitution and subject itself to that order. Every single norm of the new legal order
will be valid not because the order is efficacious, but because it is made in the manner provided by the
constitution of the State. Kelsen, therefore, does not contemplate an all omnipotent President and
Chief Martial Law Administrator sitting high above the society and handing its behests downwards. No
single man can give a constitution to the society which. in one sense, is an agreement between the
people to live together under an Order which will fulfil their expectations, reflect their, aspirations and

hold promise for the realisation of themselves. It must, therefore, embody the will of the people which
is usually expressed through the medium of chosen representatives. It must be this type of
constitution from which the norms of the new legal order will derive their validity. If this appraisal of
Kelsen is correct, then the decision in the case State v. Dosso* upholding the validity of the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order must be held to be erroneous.

A person who destroys the national legal order in an illegitimate manner cannot be regarded as a valid
source of law*making. May be, that on account of his holding the coercive apparatus of the State, the
people and the Courts are silenced *temporarily, but let it be laid down firmly that the order which the
usurper imposes will remain illegal and Courts will not recognize *its rule and act upon them as de
jure. As soon as the first opportunity arises, when the coercive apparatus falls from the hands of the
usurper; he should be tried for high treason and suitably punished. This alone will serve as a deterrent
to would‑*be adventurers.

(b) Constitution of Pakistan (1952)------

------ Art. 2(2)‑Term "Law" *Concept of "Law".

Legal theorists have spent a great deal of time and energy in elucidating the concept of law. Some
Continental jurists think of them as dictates of reason, others as commands, yet others would have us
believe that whatever is habitually obeyed is law. Even the American jurists are not unanimous.
Justice Cardoso makes an exception in the case of statutes, in so far as they are clear, and precedents
which are clearly in point. Jerome Frank on the other hand thinks that Gray's view is not sufficiently
radical. The task of a Judge in the circumstances, is not an easy one. But is it necessary for him to
define law? Law itself is not a legal concept, for, what is law is really a theoretical question.
Conclusions of law do not depend upon the definition of law nor are legal judgments based on
definitions of law and, in fact, as Sir Ivor Jennings has said in his Article on the Institutional Theory
published in Modern Theories of Law, Oxford University Press. 1933 (page 83) "the task which many
writers on Jurisprudence attempt to fulfil in defining law is a futile one", for, according to him, "law has
no definition except in a particular context." So far as a Judge is concerned, if a definition is
necessary, all that he has to see is that the law which he is called upon to administer, is made by a
person or authority legally competent to make laws and the law is capable of being enforced by the
legal machinery.

Per Yaqoob Ali, J. "Law" was not defined in the Constitu*tion. It is, therefore, for the Courts to lay
down what 'law' is, and if any decree, or behest of Yahya Khan expressed as a Martial Law Order,
Martial Law Regulation or Presidential Order or Ordinance, does not conform to the meaning of the
term 'Law' in Article 2 of the Constitution of Pakistan (1962) these Regulations, Orders and Ordinances
will be void and of no legal effect.

In introduction to "Law in the Making" C. K. Allen mentions two antithetic conceptions of growth of law
: (i) law Is which is imposed by a sovereign will ; and (ii) law which .develops within society of its own
vitality. He criticises Austin who defined "law" as the will of the sovereign and points out that whatever
be the constitutional instrument which secures observance and enforcement of law‑and some sanction
of this kind is certainly indispensable‑‑there is no historical justification for the view that this power
always and necessarily must be a determinate, "human superior" which at the same time createsall
law. It is impossible in every form of society governed by law to disengage and personify a
"sovereign" as thus understood, with the artificial precision which Hobbes and Austin assume.

Salmond describes "law" as body of principles recognised and applied by the State in the
administration of justice as the rules recognised and acted upon by Courts of justice. All the theories
of law are at one in viewing law as consistent of rules. Such rules are regarded by natural law as
dictates of reason, to positivism as decrees of the sovereign and by realism as the practice of the
Courts. The central notion of the natural law theory is that there exist objective moral principles which
depend on the essential nature of the universe and which can be discovered by natural reason, and
that ordinary human law is only truly law in so far as it conforms to these principles. These principles

of justice and morality constitute the natural law which is valid of necessity, because the rules for
human conduct are logically connected with truths concerning human nature. Diametrically opposed to
the theory of natural law is the positivist or imperative theory of law. It seeks to define law not by
reference to its condition. but according to the formal criteria which differentiate legal rule from other
source such as those of morals, etiquette, and so on. It is a type of command, it is laid by a political
sovereign and is enforceable by sanction. Realism, like positivism, looks on law as the expression of
the will of the State as made through the medium of the Courts.

According to Holmes law is really what the Judge decides. This great American Judge sowed the seed
of the American realism in a famous paper in which he put forward. a novel way of looking at law. If
one wishes to know what law is, he said, one should view it through the eyes of a bad man, who is
only concerned with what will happen to him if he does certain things. The prophecies of what the
Courts will do to the bad man, in the opinion of Justice Holmes, is what he means by the law.

In "A Grammar of Politics" Laski adds: "To those for whom law is a simple command, legal by virtue of
the source from which it comes, it is not likely that such complexities as these will be popular. We are
urging that law is, in truth, not the will of the State, but that from which the will of the State derives
whatever moral authority it may possess . . . . It assumes that the rationale of obedience is in all the
intricate facts of social organisation and in no one group of facts. It denies at once the sovereignty of
the State, and that more subtle doctrine by which the State is at once the master and the servant of
law by willing to limit itself to certain tested rules of conduct. It insists that what is important in law is
not the fact of command, but the end at which that command aims and the way it achieves the end.

Pakistan is an Islamic Republic. Its ideology is enshrined in the Objectives Resolution of the 7th April
1949, which inter alia declares "wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in the
individual and collective spheres in accordance with the teachings and requirements of Islam as set
out in the Holy Quran and Sunnah". We should, therefore, turn more appropriately to Islamic
Jurisprudence for the definition of "Law". One method of defining "Law" is to know its source. In
Shari'at laws have divine origin. They are contained in the Holy Qaran, and Hadith, namely, precepts
and actions of the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him. The other sources are Ijma' Consensus and
juristic deductions including Qiyas : Analogy, Istihsen or Juristic Equity, Public Good, Istidlal : Reason
and Ijtihad ; Juristic Exposition. While Juristic Deductions are judge‑made laws, Ijma' is based on the
doctrine of Imam Shafi'i that "the voice of the people is the voice of God", and is the most fruitful
source of law‑making in Shariat. In the present day context the Legislative Assemblies comprising of
chosen representatives of the people perform this function. Thus, in Islamic Jurisprudence, the will of
a sovereign, be he the monarch, the President or the Chief Martial Law Administrator is not the source
of law. The people as delegatee of the sovere*ignty of the Almighty alone can make laws which are in
conformity with the Holy Quran and Sunnah.

The preponderant view appears to be that law is not the will of a sovereign. Law is a body of
principles‑called rules or norms*-recognised and applied by the State in the administration of justice
as rules recognised and acted upon by the Courts of justice. It must have the contents and form of
law. It should contain one or more elements on which the different theories of law are based, and give
expression to the will of the people whose conduct and behaviour the law is going to regulate. The will
of the people is nowadays often expressed through the medium of Legislature comprising of the
chosen representatives of the people. The will of a single man howsoever laudable or sordid is a
behest or a command, but is certainly not law as understood in juristic sense.

(c) Constitution of Pakistan (1962)---

--‑Courts having given full effect to Constitution of 1962 and having adjudicated upon rights and
duties of citizens in accordance with laws thereof, all laws made and acts done by Government thus
acquired not only de facto validity but also de jure validity by reason of unquestioned recog*nition
extended to them by Courts of highest jurisdiction in the country.

The Courts in the country gave full effect to the Constitution of 1962 and adjudicated upon the rights

and duties of citizens in accordance with the terms thereof by recognizing this law constitutive
medium as a competent authority to exercise that function as also enforced the laws created by that
medium in a number of cases. Thus all the laws made and acts done by the various Governments, civil
and military, became lawful and valid by reason of the recognition given to them by the new
Constitution and the Courts. They had not only de facto validity but also acquired de jure validity by
reason of the unquestioned recognition extended to them by the Courts of highest jurisdiction in the
country. The validity of the acts done thereunder are no longer, therefore, open to challenge.

(d) Court duty of--------

---‑No duty cast on Courts to enter upon purely academic exercises or to pronounce upon hypothetical
questions *Court's judicial function: to adjudicate upon real and present con*troversy formally raised
before it by litigant‑Court would not suo motu raise a question and decide it.

The Courts do not decide abstract hypothetical or contingent questions or give mere declarations in
the air. There is no duty cast on the Courts to enter upon purely academic exercises or to pronounce
upon hypothetical questions. The Court's judicial function is to adjudicate upon a real and present
controversy which is formally raised before it by a litigant. If the litigant does not choose to raise a
question, however, important it might be, it is not for the Court to raise it suo motu.

(e) Stare decisis‑Doctrine of stare decisis‑------

----Flexible in its application ‑Law cannot stand still nor can the Courts and Judges be mere slaves of
precedents.

In spite of a Judge's fondness for the written word and his normal inclination to adhere to prior
precedents one cannot fail to recognise that it is equally important to remember that there is need for
flexibility in the application of this rule, for, law cannot stand still nor can the Judge, become mere
slaves of precedents. The rule of stare decisis does not apply with the same strictness in criminal,
fiscal and constitutional matters where the liberty of the subject is involved or some other grave
injustice is likely to occur by strict adherence to the rule.

Per Yaqoob Ali, J.‑Stare decisis is the rule of expediency and public policy and is not inflexible and will
not be applies where injustice is done or injury caused. This rule will also not apply if the language is
not ambiguous. It will apply where two interpreta*tions are open and Court having adopted one
interpretation it may not depart from it, if it upsets contracts, titles and marriages, etc.

(f) Bias‑------

---Bias in Judge‑Mere association with drafting of a law‑Does not necessarily disqualify a Judge from
interpreting that law in the light of arguments advanced before him.

(g) Jurisdiction ‑----

------ Superior Courts are Judge of their own jurisdiction.

The Courts undoubtedly have the power to hear and determine any matter or controversy which is
brought before them, even if it be to decide whether they have the jurisdiction to determine such a
matter or not. The superior Courts are, as is now well settled, the Judges of their own jurisdiction.
This is a right which has consistently been claimed by Supreme Court and other Courts of superior
jurisdiction in all civilised countries.

(h) Proclamation of Martial Law, 1969-----

------ Provisional Constitu*tion Order 1969; Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order
[President's order 3 of 1969] and Martial Law Regulation 78 [C. M.L.As.'] of 1971‑Military rule sought
to be imposed upon country by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan by Proclamation of Martial Law,
1969‑Entirely illegal‑Presidential Order 3 of 1969, being a sub‑constitutional legislation, could not
curtail jurisdiction conferred by Constitution of Pakistan (1962) upon Supreme Court and High
Courts‑Presidential Order 3 of 1969 ; an unconstitutional document Martial Law Regulation 78 ; not
only invalid and illegitimate but also incapable of being sustain*ed even on ground of necessity.

From the examination of the various authorities on the subject one is driven to the conclusion that the
Proclamation of Martial Law does not by itself involve the abrogation of the civil law and the
functioning of the civil authorities and certainly does not vest the Commander of the Armed Forces
with the power of abrogating the fundamental law of the country. It would be paradoxical indeed if
such a result could flow from the invocation in the aid of a State or an agency set up and. maintained
by the State itself for its own protection from external invasion and internal disorder. If the argument
is valid that the proclamation of the Martial Law by itself leads to the complete destruction of the legal
order, then the armed forces. do not assist the State in suppressing disorder but actually create
further disorder, by disrupting the entire legal order of the State It is therefore not correct to say that
the proclamation of Martial Law by itself must necessarily give the Commander of the armed forces
the power to abrogate the Constitution, which he is bound by his oath to defend. If this be so, then
from where did General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan acquire the right to *assume control of the
reins of Government? Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan did not appoint him as his successor by his
letter of the 24th March 1969. He merely called upon him to perform his "constitutional and legal duty
to restore order" in the country. If this was his authority, then the only authority he got was to restore
order and nothing more. Even the imposition of Martial Law by his proclamation is of doubtful. validity,
because the proclamation should have come from the civil authorities and it was only then that under
the proclamation the Commander of the armed forces could have moved into action. There is no
provision in any law which gives the Commander of the armed forces the right to proclaim Martini
Law, although he has like all other loyal citizens of the country a bounden duty to assist the State,
when called upon to do so. If the magnitude of the insurrection is so great that the Courts and the
civil administration are unable to function, the military may exercise all such powers that may be
necessary to achieve their objective and in doing so may even set up Military Tribunals to promptly
punish wrong‑doers but this, whether done throughout the country or in a restricted area within the
country, merely temporarily suspends the functioning of the civil Courts and the civil administration.
As soon as the necessity for the exercise of the military power is over, the civil administration must, of
necessity, be restored, and assume its normal role. It is not without significance that after the
so‑called imposition of Martial Law in 1969 the Martial Law Authorities had no occasion to fire even a
single shot and found the conditions so normal that the civil administration never ceased to function
and all the Courts continued to sit for all purposes. In fact the situation was so normal that within a
few days the reality had to be accepted and even the Constitution was brought back except in so far
as it had been purported to be altered by the creation of the office of President and the assumption of
that office by the Chief Martial Law Administrator. Protection was also purported to be given to the
acts of all Martial Law Administrators and their subordinates acting under their orders to save them
from the consequences of their otherwise illegal acts. If Martial Law was by itself a sufficient legal
cover then why was this special protection necessary. This country was not a foreign country which
had been invaded by any foreign army with General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan at its head nor was
it an alien territory which had been occupied by the said army. The question of imposition of "military
rule" as an incident of jus belli of international law could not, in the circumstances, possibly have
arisen. The only form of martial law, therefore, that could possibly have been imposed in this country,
assuming that such a state of large scale disorder had come to prevail in the country as was
suggested by Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan in his letter of the 24th of March 1969, was a
martial law of the kind which could be imposed under the English common law and was imposed by
the British from time to time in 1919 in Amritsar, Lahore and Gujranwala, in 1921 in the areas
inhabited by the Moplas, in 1930 in Sholapur, in 1942 in areas occupied by Hurs in Sind and in 1953 in
Lahore. Under these martial laws there was, of course, no question of abrogation of any Constitution
or of the introduction of military rule in supersession of the civil administration normally functioning in
other parts of the country. Looked at, therefore, either from the constitutional point of view or the

Martial Law point of view whatever was done in March 1969, either by Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub
Khan or General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan was entirely without any legal foundation. It was not
even a revolution or a military coup d'etat in any sense of those terms. The Military Commander did
not takeover the reins of Government by force nor did he oust the constitutional President. The
constitutional President out of his own free will and accord in response to the public's demand,
stepped aside and called upon the Military Commander to restore law and order, as he was bound to
do both under the law and under the Constitution. On the stepping aside of the constitutional
President the constitutional machinery should have automatically come into effect and the Speaker
should have taken over as Acting President until fresh elections were held for the choice of a
successor. The political machinery would then have moved according to the Constitution and the
National and Provincial Assemblies would have taken steps to resolve the political disputes, if any, if
the Military Commander had not by an illegal order dissolved them. The Military Commander, however,
did not allow the constitutional machinery to come into effect but usurped the functions of
Government and started issuing all kinds of Martial Law Regulations, Presidential Orders and even.
Ordinances.

Therefore, there can be no question that the military rule sought to be imposed upon the country by
General Agha *Muhammad Yahya Khan was entirely illegal.

The Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 is a sub‑constitutional legislation and it could not have curtailed
the jurisdiction that was given to the High Courts and to the Supreme Court by the Constitution of
1962, for, that jurisdiction was preserved even by the Provisional Constitution Order.

Looking at the matter, therefore, from any point of view, whether, from the strictly legal and
constitutional side, or on the basis of the principle of implied authority or even in terms of the
so‑called legal order purported to be created by the Provisional Constitution Order of 1969 itself, the
conclusion cannot be escaped that the Presidential Order No. 3 was an unconstitutional document,
General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan had no authority to pass such legislation taking away the
powers of the Courts in his capacity as President under the Provisional Constitution Order. The Martial
Law introduced by him was illegal and, therefore, even as Chief Martial Law Administrator he was not
competent to validly pass such laws, and it certainly was in excess of the implied authority, if any,
given to him by the letter of Field‑Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan dated the 24th of March 1969.

The Martial Law Regulation No. 78 gives very wile powers to the Chief Martial Law Administrator and a
Zonal Martial Law Administrator and even a Deputy Martial Law Adminis*trator to detain a person
without trial for any length of time, without giving him any reasons for such detention or any
opportunity even of making any representation against such a detention. These are indeed very
extraordinary powers for taking away the most cherished right of a citizen in a most arbitrary manner.
They provide no machinery for seeking any redress against any possible abuse or misuse of power or
for making any representation or even for an appeal from Ceaser to Ceaser.

Both the Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 and the Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971 were made
by an incompetent authority and, therefore, lacked the attribute of legitimacy which is one of the
essential characteristics of a valid law. The Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 was also invalid on two
additional grounds, namely, that it was a Presidential Order, which could not in terms of the
Provisional Constitution Order itself amend the Constitution so as to take away the jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Courts under Article 98 of the Con*stitution of Pakistan 1962 and that it
certainly could not, in any event, take away the judicial power of the Courts to hear and determine
questions pertaining even to their own jurisdiction and this power could not be vested in another
authority as long as the Courts continued to exist.

Per Yaqoob Ali, J.‑As both President's Order No. 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation 78 were
intended to deny to the Courts the performance of their judicial functions, an object opposed to the
concept of law, neither would be recognised by Courts as law.

Martial Law is of three types: (i) the law regulating discipline and other matters determining the rule

of conduct applicable to the Armed forces. The present case is not concerned with it; (ii) law which is
imposed on an alien territory under occupation by an armed force. The classic function of this type of
martial law was given by the Duke of Willington when he stated in the House of Lords that "Martial
Law is neither more nor less than the will of the General who commands the Army. In fact, Martial Law
means no law at all." This case is also not concerned with this type of Martial law; and (iii) law which
relates to and arises out of a situation in which the civil power is unable to maintain law and order and
the Military power is used to meet force and re‑create conditions of peace and tranquility in which the
civil power can re‑assert its authority. The Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law Orders passed
under this type of Martial Law must be germane only to the restoration of peace and tranquillity and
induced during the period of unrest. In practice, the Martial Law imposed by Yahya Khan belonged to
the second category. A large number of Martial Law Regula*tions and Martial Law Orders passed by
him between 25th. March 1969 and 20th March 1971, had no nexus with civil disturbances. In fact,
peace and tranquility was restored in the country within a few days of his stepping in. Martial Law
should, therefore, have come to an end, but the entire structure of Institutions of Pakistan including
superior Courts were made to appear by Yahya Khan as merely the expression of his will which a
victorious military commander imposes on an alien territory to regulate the conduct and behaviour of
its subjugated populace. Neither Pakistan was a conquered territory, nor the Pakistan Army
commanded by Yahya Khan was an alien force to justify the imposition of this type of Martial Law. The
Martial Law imposed by Yahya Khan was, therefore, in itself illegal and all Martial Law Regulations and
Martial Law Orders issued by him were on this simple ground void ab initio and of no legal effect.

(i) Interpretation of statutes‑----

-----Legislation‑Illegal and illegi*timate legislation‑Doctrine of necessity‑Illegal usurpation of power by
a Military adventurer‑All laws enacted during such regime illegal ‑Everything done during such
intervening period both good and bad cannot, however, be treated in the same manner‑Recourse
could be had to the doctrine of necessity to condone the illegality and validate certain legislation in
order to sane the country from greater chaos and the citizens from further difficulties.

The grabbing of power and installing himself as the President and Chief Martial Law Administrator of
Pakistan by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan by the Proclamation of 1969 having been declared
by the Supreme Court to be entirely illegal. The question arose whether everything (legislative
measures and other acts) done during his illegal regime, whether good or bad, can be treated in the
same manner and branded as illegal and of no effect.

Held : Grave responsibility, in such circumstances, rests upon Courts not to do anything which might
make confusion worse confounded or create a greater state of chaos if that can possibly be avoided
consistently with their duty to decide in accordance with law. Acts done by those actually in control
without lawful authority may be recognized as valid or acted upon by the Courts within certain
limitations, on principles of necessity. There is no doubt that a usurper may do things both good and
bad, and he may have during the period of usurpation also made many Regulations or taken actions
which would be valid if emanating from a lawful Government and which may well have, in the course
of time, affected the enforcement of contracts, the celebration of marriages, the settlement of estates,
the transfer of property and similar subjects. All these cannot be invalidated and toe country landed
once again into confusion? Such a principle, has also been adopted in America in various cases which
came up after the suppression of the rebellion of the Southern States and the American Courts too
adopted the policy that where the acts done by the usurper were "necessary to peace and good order
among citizens and had affected property or contractual rights they should not be invalidated", not
because they were legal but because they would cause inconvenience to innocent persons and lead to
further difficulties.

Recourse therefore has to be taken to the doctrine of necessity where the ignoring of it would result in
disastrous consequences to the body politic and upset the social order itself but one has to disagree
with the view that this is a doctrine for validating the illegal acts of usurpers. This doctrine can be
Invoked in aid only after the Court has come to the conclusion that the acts of the usurpers were
illegal and illegitimate. It is only then that the question arises as to how many of his acts, legislative
or otherwise, should be condoned or maintained, notwithstanding their Illegality in the wider public
interest. This principle would be called a principle of condonation and not legitimization.

Applying this test the Court condoned (1) all transactions which are past and closed, for, no useful
purpose can be served by re‑opening them, (2) all acts and legislative measures which are in
accordance with, or could have been made under, the abrogated Constitution or the previous legal
order, (3) all acts which tend to advance or promote the good of the people, (4) all acts required to be
done for the ordinary orderly running of the State and all such measures as would establish or lead to
the establishment of, the objectives mentioned in the Objectives Resolution of 1954. The Court would
not, however, condone any act intended to entrench the usurper more firmly in his power or to
directly help him to run the country contrary to its legitimate objectives. The Court would not also
condone anything which seriously impairs the rights of the citizens except in so far as they may be
designed to advance the social welfare and national solidarity.

Per Yaqoob Ali, J.‑The Laws saved by the doctrine of State necessity do not achieve validity. They
remain illegal, but acts done and proceedings undertaken under invalid laws may be condoned on the
conditions that the recognition given by the Court is proportionate to the evil. to be averted, it is
transitory and temporary in character and does not imply abdication of judicial review.

(j) Maxim--------

Salus populi cot suprema lox (the safety of the people is the supreme law).

(k) Maxim----

-- Inter arms leges silent (in the midst of arms the laws are silent).

Salmond on Jurisprudence ; George Whitecross Paton's Textbook on Jurisprudence ; Sir Ivor Jennings'
Article on Institutional Theory in "Modern Theories of Law", 1933, p. 63 ; Dias' book on Jurisprudence,
3rd Edn., p. 93 ; Professor Lauter pacht's Article on Kelsen's Pure Science of Law in "Modern Theories
of Law", 1933 ; Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vols. 7 & 22, pp 260, 802 ;Corpus Juris
Secundum, Vol. 21, para. 193 ; The Daily Pakistan Times, 11th November 1968 ; Laski's State in
Theory and Practice, p. 27; Garner's Treaties on Political Science and Government, p.155; G. C. Field's
Lectures on Political Theory, pp. 74‑75; Dean Roscoe Pound's magnum opus on Jurisprudence, Vol. 1i,
Part 3, p. 305; Frigowg's Supreme Court in American History, pp. 76‑82; Professor Julius Stone's
Treaties on the Legal System and Lawyers' Reasoning, 1964 Edn., p. 121 ;Modern Law Review, Vol.
26, p. 35; Oppen*helm's International Law, Vol. I, p. 127 1 Holy Quran, Pt. 3, Ch. 3, A1 'Imran, Ay.
27 ; Article by Sir William Holdsworth in Law Quarterly Review, Vol. 18, p. 117 ; Hansard, Vol. CXV,
Col. 880 ; A. V. Dicey's Law of the Constitution, p. 287 ; Black*stone's Commentaries, Vol. I, p. 381 ;
Commentaries on the Con*stitution of the United States by Chester James : Grodus on De jure belli et
pacis, Book 1, Chap. 4 ; Lakamani & Ola v. Attorney-*General (West), Nigeria ref. In S. A. de Smith
on Constitutional and Administration Law; The Attorney‑General of the Republic. v. Mustafa Ibrahim
and others 1964 C L R 195; 18 Law. Ed. 281; 87 Law. Ed. 1; 90 Law. Ed. 688; "A Grammar of Politics"
by Laski; Yick Wo v. Hopking ; Law In The Making by C. K Allen; Modern Theories of Law, pp.
107‑108; Friends Not Masters by Muhammad Ayub Khan and Fundamental Law of Pakistan, p. 598 by
Brohi.

State v. Dosso P L D 1958 S C (Pak.) 533 ; Federation of Pakistan v. Mould Tamizuddin Khan P L D
1955 F C 240; Yusuf Patel v. The Crown P L D 1955 F C 387; Presidential Reference No. 1 of 1955 P L
D 1955 F C 435 ; Fazlul Qadir Chowdhury anti others v. Muhammad Abdul Hague P L D 1963 S C 486;
Syed Abul A'ala Maudoodi and another v. The Government of West Pakistan and another P L D 1964 S
C 673; The Government of East Pakistan v. Mrs. Rowshan Bijoy Shaukat Ali Khan P L D 1966 S C 286;
Malik Ghulam Jilani v. The Government of West Pakistan and another P L D 1967 S C 373; The
Government of West Pakistan and another v. Begum Agha Abdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri P L D 1969 S
C 14; Province of East Pakistan v. Muhammad Mehdi Ali Khan P L D 1959 S C (Pak.) 387; Iftlkharuddin
and another v. Muhammad Sarfaraz and another P L D 1961 S C 585; Muhammad Afzal v. The
Commissioner, Lahore Division P L D 1963 S C 401; Ch. Tanbir Ahmad Siddiky v. Government of East
Pakistan P L D 1968 S C 185; (1966) 1 W L R 1234 ; The. Governors of the Campbell College Belfast

v. Commissioner of Valuation for Northern Ireland (1964) 2 A E R 705 ; The Attorney‑General of the
Commonwealth of Australia v. Reginam and others (1957) 2 A E R 45 (P C) ; Waterside Worker's
Federation v. Alexander 25 C L R 434 ; Tilonka v. Attorney‑General of Natal 1907 A C 93 ; Rex v. Allen
(1921) 2 I R 241 ; Ex parte : Marias 1902 A C 109; Wolfe Tone's case (1798) 27 St. Tr. 614; Ex parte
: Milligan 4 Wallace 121 ; Texas v. E. Constitution 77 U S S C R 375 (Lawyers' Edition); Mir Hassan
and another v. The State P L D 1969 Lah. 786; Muhammad Ismail v. The State P L D 1969 S C 241;
Mian Fazal Ahmad v. The State 1970 S C M R 650; Marriott's English Political Institutions, 1938 Edn.,
p. 293; Madzimbamuto v. Lard*ner‑Burke and another (1968) 3 A E R 561 ; Texas v. White (1868) 7
Wallace 733; Horn v. Lockhart (1873) 17 Wallace 850; Baldy v. Hunter (1897) 171 U S 388; Uganda v.
Commissioner of Prisons ; ex parte Matovu 1966 E A L R 514.

Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1972

M. Anwar. S. M. Zafar and Ijaz Hussain Batalvi, Senior Advocates Supreme Court instructed by M. A.
Rahman, Advo*cate‑on‑Record for Appellant.

M. B. Zaman, Advocate‑General Punjab (M. Farani, A. G. Chowdhury and R. S. Sidhwa, Advocates
Supreme Court with him) instructed by Ijaz Ali, Advocate‑on‑Record for Respondent No. 1.

Nemo for Respondent No. 2.

Under Order XLV, Supreme Court Rules:

Yahya Bakhtiar, Attorney‑General for Pakistan (A. A..Zari, Advocate Supreme Court with him)
instructed by Ifiikharuddin Ahmad, Advocate‑on‑Record.

A. H. Memon, Advocate‑General Sind, Muhammad Ahmad Mirza, Advocate‑General Baluchistan,
Fakhre Alam, Advocate-*General Peshawar (present up to 22‑3‑1972).

A. K. Brohi (present up to 24‑3:1972), instructed by Fazal *Hussain, Advocate‑on‑Record and
Sharifuddin Peerzada, Senior Advocate Supreme Court Amicus curiae.

Criminal Appeal No. K‑2 of 1972

Manzoor Qadir and Ijaz Hussain Batalvi, Senior Advocates Supreme Court (Mashir Ahmad Pesh Imam,
Advocate Supreme Court with them) instructed by M. A. Rahman, Advocate‑on-*Record for Appellant.
Abdul Hafiz Memon. Advocate‑General Sind instructed by Shafiq Ahmad, Advocate‑on‑Record (present
only on 16‑3‑1972) for Respondent No. 1.

Nemo for Respondent No. 2.

Yahya Bakhtiar, Attorney‑General for Pakistan instructed by Masud Akhtar, Advocate‑on‑Record for
Respondent No. 3.

Dates of hearing: 16th, 17th, 18th and 20th to 25th March 1972.

JUDGMENT

HAMOODUR RAHMAN, C. J.‑These two appeals, by special leave, have been heard together, as they
involve common questions of law.

Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1972 (Miss Asma Jilani v. Province of Punjab) arises nut of a judgment of a
learned Single Judge of the Lahore High Court, dismissing a petition under Article 98 (2) (b) (i) of the
Constitution of 1962 filed to question the validity of the detention of the father of the petitioner. Malik
Ghulam Jilani, the detenu in this case, eras arrested at Karachi under an order dated the 22nd of
December 1971, purported to have been issued in exercise of powers con*ferred by clause (b) of
sub‑rule (1) of rule 32 read with rule 213 of the Defence of Pakistan Rules, 1971. This was the order
that was originally challenged in the High Court. The High Court admitted the petition for regular
hearing and issued notice to the Government of the Punjab for the 31st of December 1971. A day
earlier on the 30th of December this order was rescinded and substituted by another order of the
same day purported to have been issued by the Martial Law Administrator, Zone 'C', in exercise of the
powers said to have been conferred on him by Martial Law Regulation No. 78.

The petition already filed was allowed to be amended on the 31st of December 1'971, by addition of
fresh grounds attack*ing the legality of the second order of detention. When the petition came up for
hearing on the lath of January 1972, the Government raised a preliminary objection that the High
Court could not assume jurisdiction in the matter, because of the bar contained in the jurisdiction of
Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order, 1969, promulgated by the last Martial Law regime.

The High Court relying on an earlier decision of this Court in the case of State v. Dosso (P L D 1958 S
C (Pak.) 533) held that the Order of 1969 was a valid and binding law and that, as such, it had no
jurisdiction in the matter by reason of the provisions of clause 2 of the above*mentioned Order.

Leave was granted in this case to consider : (1) as to whether the doctrine enunciated in the case of
State v. Dosso was correct, (2) even if correct, whether the doctrine applied to the facts and
circumstances in which Field Marshal Ayub Khan transferred power to General Agha Muhammad Yahya
Khan, and (3) if the source of power assumed by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan was illegal
and unconstitutional then whether all legislative and executive acts done by him including the
imposition of Martial Law and the promulgation of Martial Law Regulations and Orders were illegal.

Criminal Appeal No. K‑2 of 1972 (Mrs. Zarina Gauhar v. Province of Sind and others) arises out of an
order of a High Court dismissing an application under section 497 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
read with Article 98 of the Constitution of 1962, challenging the arrest of Mr. Altaf Hussain Gauhar,
Editor‑in‑Chief, Dawn, Karachi, during the night between the 4th and 5th of February 1972, from his
house without any warrant and his subsequent detention under an order purported to have been
issued by the Martial Law Administrator, Zone 'D' under Martial Law Regulation No. 78. In this case too
a Division Bench of the High Court of Sind & Baluchistan sitting at Karachi dismissed the application on
the 10th of February 1972, holding that the Court has no jurisdiction to grant relief against Martial
Law Orders for substantially the same reasons as were given by the, Lahore High Court in the case of
Malik Ghulam Jilani.

Leave was granted by a Bench of this Court sitting at Karachi on the 24th of February 1972, as the
petition for leave to appeal raised the same questions of law which had been raised in the petition filed
by the daughter of Malik Ghulam Jilani, and the appeal was ordered to be heard at Lahore by the Full
Court Along with the appeal in the case of Malik Ghulam Jilani.

Although the main question for decision in these appeals is whether the High Courts had jurisdiction
under Article 98 of, the constitution of 1962 to enquire into the validity of the detentions complained
of in these cases 9n view of the 'oar created by the provisions of the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of
Doubts) Order, 1969 (Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969), learned counsel appearing for the appellants
have very adroitly analysed the political vicissitudes through which this unfortunate country has
passed since 1954 in order to highlight their contention that the successive manoeuvrings for
usurpation of power under the pseudonym of Martial Law were neither justified nor valid roe had ever
reached the stage of effectiveness to merit the legal recognition that yeas given to them in the case of
The Stare, v Dosso.

Mr. Manzoor Qadir appearing for the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. K‑2 of 1972 has even gone to
the extent of inviting us to lay down, if necessary, new norms and examine the foundations of the
norms themselves in order to determine the nature, scope and content of the "law" in accordance with
which we are bound by our oaths to administer justice and according to which a citizen is entitled to
demand justice in term" of the solemn undertaking contained in clause (2) of Article 2 of the
Constitution, which is as follows:‑

(2) In particular‑‑

(a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of ant parson shall be taken
except in accordance with law;

(b) no person shall be prevented from, or be hindered in, doing that which is not prohibited by law;
and

(c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the law does not require him to do."

But when it was pointed out to him that the problem of defining the "law" has become so engulfed in
philosophical perplexities that it was well‑nigh impossible to lay down any precise definition of the
terra, he contented himself by referring to the definitions givers by the jurists of the American realist
school of thought who by and large subscribe to the view that law is that which the Courts recognise
as law. He adopts the definition of professor J. C. Gray that "the law of the State or of any organised
body of men is composed of the rules which the Courts, that is, the judicial organs of that body, lay
down for the determination of legal rights and duties". He also Quotes from Salmond on Jurisprudence
and George Whitecross Paton's text book on Jurisprudence to show that jurists of other countries too
hold the same view.

This may be a perfectly good definition from the legal practitioners' point of view but legal theorists
have spent a great deal of time and energy in elucidating the concept of law. Some Continental jurists
think of them as dictates of reason, others as commands, yet others would have us believe that
whatever is habitually obeyed is law. Even the American jurists are not unanimous. Justice Cardozo
snakes an exception in the case of statutes, in so far as they are clear, and precedents which are
clearly in point. Jerome Frank on the other hand thinks that Gray's view is not sufficiently radical. The
task of a Judge in the circumstances, is not an easy one. But is it necessary for him td define law? Law
itself is not a legal concept, for, what is law is really a theoretical question. Conclusions of law do not
depend upon the definition of law nor are legal judgments based on definitions of law and, in fact, as
Sir Iver Jennings has said in his Article on the Institutional Theory published in Modern Theories of
Law, Oxford University Press, 1933 (page 83) "the task which many writes on Jurisprudence attempt
to fulfil in defining law is a futile one'”, for, according to him, "law has no definition except in a
particular context"

So far as a Judge is concerned, if a definition is necessary, all that he has to see is that the law which

he is called upon to administer is made by a person or authority legally competent to make laws and
the law is capable of being enforced by the legal machinery. This, in my view, brings in the notion
both of legitimacy and efficacy.

It is interesting to note that Dias in his book on Jurispru*dence, Third Edition (page 93) describes
legislation as "law made deliberately in a set form by an authority, which the Courts have accepted as
competent to exercise that function." This brings in, of course, the concept of the legitimacy of laws
but in addition to this Dias also thinks that there are other factors such as "adaptability, effectiveness,
consonance with morality and the socio‑political background", which might influence the Courts in
giving recognition to laws, He, however thinks that "effec*tiveness" is not a condition of the
"law‑quality" of its enactments or even of itself, because. "the validity of laws and of the law*
constitutive medium are separate questions." According to him, "the effectiveness of the legislative
authority is not a condition of the validity either of laws or even of itself. It is a factor which in time
induces the Courts to accept such authority, and it is not the only one." The thesis of Dias is thus the
same as that now adopted by the learned counsel; namely, that "the legality of the law‑constitutive
medium only comes about when the Courts accept, or are made to accept it."

From this it is argued that the power of pronouncing upon the validity of a law is an inherent power
vested in the superior Courts as a necessary conmoitant of the judicial power itself and, therefore, any
law, which purports to take away that power Itself and seeks to stultify the functioning of the Courts,
cannot be recognised as a "law" in the strict juristic sense. It is further pointed out that this principle
has also been consistently followed by the superior Courts in this country. Thus in the case of
Federation of Pakistan v. Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan (P L D 1955 F C 240) the Federal Court, quite
undeterred by the disastrous consequences that were likely to ensue, claimed that it had the right "to
expound the law in complete in difference to any popular reaction", even if the result is disaster", and
declared a constitutional amendment made by the sovereign Constituent Assembly of Pakistan invalid
on the ground that it had not received the assent of the Governor-*General, although admittedly the
consistent practice of the Constituent Assembly since its inception had been that constitu*tional
provisions enacted by it were not put up for the assent of the Governor‑General and no
Governor‑General had hithertofore objected to this practice. In consequence of this decision it was
found that a large number of constitutional enactments of the Constituent Assembly, which had not
received the assent of the Governor‑General, were likely to become invalid. The Governor‑General,
therefore, sought to validate such acts by indicating his assent with retrospective effect by means of
an Ordinance called the Emergency Powers Ordinance No. 9 of 1955. The Federal Court again in the
case of Yusuf Patel v. The Crown (P L D 1955 F C 387) declared the Emergency Powers Ordinance
itself to be invalid, as the Governor‑General was not, under the Independence Act, an authority
competent to legislate in the constitutional field which was the exclusive reserve of the Constituent
Assembly.

The disaster, which was apprehended in the case of Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan, had occurred. The
Governor‑General had unconstitutionally dissolved the Constituent Assembly. Proceed*ings taken to
question the validity of the Governor‑General's action by invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court
under section 223‑A of the Government of India Act were held to be incompetent, because, that
section itself had been incorporated in the Government of India Act by a resolution of the Constituent
Assembly which had not, according to the practice up to that time prevailing, been formally put up for
the assent of the Governor‑General, though tacitly accepted and acted upon in a large number of
cases. Thereafter when the Governor‑General attempted to validate a vast body of such constitutional
legisla*tions, which had been passed between 1947 and 1954, retrospectively by an Ordinance, the
Ordinance itself was struck down. In desperation the Governor‑General in his turn invoked the
advisory jurisdiction of the Federal Court under section 213 of the Government of India Act vide
Governor‑General's Reference No. 1 of 1955 (P L D 1955 F C 435), and asked the Court to find a
solution for the "constitutional" impasse created by the judgments of the Court itself. The Federal
Court again* came to his rescue and although no "law" of any kind could be found to meet the
situation, it invoked in aid "the supreme principle of necessity embodied in the maxim salus populi est
suprema lex", and on the basis thereof evolved a new political formula for the setting up of a new
Constituent Assembly, even though this very maxim when used in support of the con*tention of
Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan that the invalidation of a large number of constitutional laws merely on the
ground of want of formal assent of the Governor‑General would cause "disaster" and create a
"Constitutional impasse" had not found favour with the Court.

The object of the learned counsel in referring to these decisions is presumably to suggest that from
this day onwards whatever constitutional developments took place were not strictly legal. The

1956‑Constitution, under which the principle of parity was accepted and the country was divided into
two Provinces of East and West Pakistan, was, it is alleged, a Constitution framed by an illegally
constituted body which was, under the threat of refusal of assent, also coerced into electing General
Iskander Mirza as the first President of Pakistan under the Constitution. The process of illegality thus
set in motion led in its turn to the illegal usurpation of power by the President so elected under the
said Constitution abrogating the Constitution and declaring Martial Law on the 7th of October 1958.
This was followed three days later by the promulgation of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order on
the 10th of October 1958.

Within a few days thereafter a case which has now become a cause celebre under the title of the State
v. Dosso, came up for hearing on the 13th of October 1958. The main question agitated there was as
to whether the proceedings, which were for a writ of habeas corpus and/or certiorari had abated by
reason of the provisions of the. Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958. The Court on the very next
day, i. e. the 14th of October 1958, announced its decision that they had abated but when giving its
reasons for the decision on the 23rd of October 1958, went on also to accord legal recognition to the
Martial Law itself by describing it as a successful revolution and, therefore, a fresh law creating organ.
The very next day, however, the new law *creator himself, who had purported to give the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order, 1958 under his command and the authority of the Martial Law
proclaimed by him, was deposed by the Chief Administrator of Martial Law created in exercise of the
same power. The latter subsequently, without creating any new organic law, quietly assumed the office
of President also and continued to function as such until 1960 when he managed to secure a so‑called
mandate by some sort of a referendum to frame a Constitution. This Constitution was framed by him
and came into operation from the 7th of June 1962. The country by and large accepted this
Constitution and even the Judges took oath under the fresh Constitution. Two Presidential elections
were held under this Constitution, the erstwhile Commander‑in‑Chief was elected on both occasions.
National and Provincial Assemblies were set up and the country continued to be governed in
accordance with its terms until the 25th of March 1969.

The Courts in the country also gave full effect to this Constitution and adjudicated upon the rights and
duties of citizen in accordance with the terms thereof by recognizing this Law constitutive medium as
a competent authority to exercise that function as also enforced the laws created by that medium in a
number of cases. (Vide Mr. Fazlul Qadir Chowuhury and others v. Mr. Muhammad Abdul Haque (P L D
1963 S C 486). Syed Abut A'ala Maudoodi and another v. The Government of West Pakistan and
another (P L D 1964 S C 673), The Government of East Pakistan v. Mrs. Roshan Bijoy Shaukat Ali
Khan (P L D 1966 S C 286), Malik Ghulam Jilani v. The Government of West Pakistan and another (P L
D 1967 S C 373) and The Government of West Pakistan and another v. Begum Agha Abdul Karim
Shorish Kashmiri (P L D 1969 S C 14).

Thus even according to the arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the appellants
all the laws made and acts done by the various Governments, civil and military, became lawful and
valid by reason of the recognition given to them by the new Constitution and the Courts. They had not
only de facto validity but also acquired de jure validity by reason of the unquestioned recognition
extended to them by the Court of highest jurisdiction in the country. The validity of the acts done
thereunder are no longer, therefore, open to challenge, even under the concept of law propounded by
the realist school of jurists and adopted by the learned counsel for the appellants.

The question, however, with which we are now concerned is whether we should extend similar
recognition on the basis of the *principle enunciated in the case of State v. Dosso to what happened
on and after the 25th of March 1969, and recognise as valid laws the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal
of Doubts) Order, 1969 (President's Order No. 3 of 1969), which purports to take*away even our
power to consider this question, and the Martial Law Regulation No. 78 promulgated on the 17th of
April 1971, under which the detenus before us are now being detained.

In the above‑mentioned case, as already pointed out, the *question which fall to be determined was
as to whether the writs issued by the High Court had abated by reason of the provisions of clause (7)
of Article 2 of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order promulgated on the 10th of October 1958, after
the abroga*tion of the 1956‑Constitution and the declaration of Martial Law by the then President, the
late Mr. Iskander Mirza. From the report of the judgment in Dosso's case it does not appear that the
question of the validity of the abrogation of the Consti*tution, or of the promulgation of Martial Law or
of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, was directly put in issue. The learned

Attorney‑General, who then appeared for one of the respondents therein, has categorically stated
from the Bar that he was not even allowed to raise this question. This Court, nevertheless, entered
upon an appraisal of the constitutional position and purporting to apply the doctrine of "legal
positivism" propounded by Hans Kelsen, came to the conclusion that where "a Constitution and the
national legal order under fit is disrupted by an abrupt political change not within the contemplation of
the Constitution", then such a change "is called a revolution and its legal effect Is not only the
destruction of the existing Constitution but also the validity of the national legal order." Therefore any
change, no matter how or by whom brought about, whether by violence or non‑violent coup d'etat or
even by a person already in a public position, is "in law a revolution if it annuls the Constitution and
the annulment is effective". (The underlining is mine). Under this theory it was held that if persons
assuming power under such a change "can successfully require the inhabitants of the country to
conform to the new regime, then the revolution itself becomes a law‑creating fact, because thereafter
its own legality is judged not by reference to the annulled Constitution but by reference to Its own
success." Thus the validity of the laws made thereafter has to be judged by reference to the new
dispensation and not the annulled Constitution. This theory was further sought to be fortified on the
basis that even according to the international law "a victorious revolution or a successful coup d'etat is
an inter*nationally recognised legal method of changing a Constitution."

Learned counsel appearing in support of the appellants as also the learned counsel who have assisted
the Court as amicii curiae have challenged the correctness of this theory and have contended that no
such wide proposition had been propounded by Hans Kelsen and even if it had been it would be the
solitary view of Hans Kelsen which has not been subscribed to by any other legal theorist. Indeed, it
has been pointed out that Professor Lauterpacht in his Article on Kelsen's Pure Science of Law
published in the Modern Theories of Law, Oxford University Press, 1933, goes to the extent of
describing Kelsen as "an iconoclast" amongst jurists. In any event, it is contended that the Court in
Dosso's case went even beyond Kelsen himself and the theory propounded by this Court actually
amounts to making a rule of international law a rule of decision in the field of municipal law. The
learned Chief Justice who delivered the main judgment of the majority comprising the Court, it is
urged, was fully aware that, even according to Kelsen, "the essential condition to determine whether a
Constitution has been annulled is the efficacy of the change" but did not wait to see whether that
efficacy had, in fact, been attained by the change to which he was giving legal recognition. The case,
it is further pointed out, was heard and decided within six days of the promulgation of the Martial Law
and within three days of the promulgation of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order. It was too early
yet to hazard even a guess as to its efficacy. Indeed had the learned Chief Justice waited a few more
days he would have seen that the efficacy was non‑existent. This was more than amply demonstrated
by the removal of the so‑called successful law‑creator himself the very next day after the publication
of the judgment of the Court. Where then, it is said, was "the essential condition" for the recognition
of the change ?

On general principles too learned counsel have attempted to show that the theory of Hans Kelsen was
itself not sound in several respects and the criticisms levelled against his doctrines were so forceful
that he himself had been compelled later to modify his views.

The learned Attorney‑General appearing for the State has made no serious attempt to support the
reasonings in Dosso's case or to justify the theories of Hans Kelsen apart from referring to one or two
passages from some other jurists who too had apparently advanced the view that the de facto
sovereign may, in certain circumstances, also be treated as the de jure sovereign but what he has
most strenuously contended is that the law laid down in Dosso's case has now become the law of the
land. It has been re‑armed in various subsequent decisions and thus acquired a position which cannot
be now reversed after 13 years. The decision in Dosso's case is now, according to him, the legal order
and that has to be followed. He has also invoked in aid the principle of stare decisis to support his
contention that the law laid down in that case should not now be changed.

It is true that the decision in Dosso's case did come up for consideration subsequently in several other
cases and the Court re‑affirmed its decision. The first of these was the case of the Province of East
Pakistan v. Muhammad Mehdi Ali Khan (P L D 1959 S C (Pak.) 387) and it may be worth while to
quote what the learned Chief Justice himself stated with regard thereto :‑

"I may now take up the question whether there are sufficient grounds for reviewing or revising the
view taken by this Court in the case of Dosso. In approaching that question the first thing to be seen

is what that case actually decides. In the judgment that was under appeal in that case some
provisions of the Frontier Crimes Regulation had been held to be void because of their being
inconsistent with a funda*mental right and, before the appeal came up for hearing, the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order was promulgated by the President. The Court held that after the coming
into force of that Order no law could be declared or held to be void merely because it came into
conflict with a fundamental right and that all pending applications for writs in which a law by reason of
Part II of the Constitution had to be found to be void in order to grant the relief prayed for by a party
had abated by force of clause (7) of Article 2 of that Order. The Court arrived at this result by reading
Article 2(4) with Article 4(1) of the Order and by holding that after the promulgation of that Order Part
11 of the late Constitution had ceased to be available to adjudge the invalidity of the laws that were in
force immediately before the Proclamation. The matter had not then been so fully and ably argued as
now, but despite the ingenious and at times far‑fetched arguments addressed, I am convinced more
than before that case was rightly decided."

It will be observed from the above that the question of the validity of the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order, 1958, itself was not directly under challenge in Dosso's case but what was being contended
there was that, in spite of the said Order, "all pending applications for writs, in which a law by reason
of Part 11 of the Constitution (1956) had to be found to be void in order to grant the relief prayed for
by a party, had abated by force of clause (7) of Article 2 of that Order.

The Court, as has been pointed out by the learned Attorney-General himself who appeared on behalf
of one of the respondents in that case, in fact, proceeded on the assumption that the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order was a valid law and heard no arguments challenging the validity of the
said Order itself. The observations in that judgment, based upon the theory of Hans Kelsen were,
therefore, more in the nature of obiter dicta.

Dosso's case next came up for consideration again in the case of Ifiikharuddin and another v.
Muhammad Sarfaraz and another (P L D 1961 S C 585=(1962) 2 P S C R 197). There too the
propriety of an Order passed under Martial Law Regulation No. 72 was called in question and the
Government pleaded immunity to jurisdiction. Again, the vires of the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order was not put in issue but all that was contended was as to whether the word "governed" referred
to in that Order included also the legislative functions of Government. The Court by a majority
judgment differed from the majority in Dosso's case and held that it was unable to agree that the
words "all laws" referred to In that Order did not include the Constitution or so much of it as had been
re‑introduced by the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order. The majority judgment with which I
concurred, observed :‑

"The correct position is that in Article 2 of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, the Constitution had
already been adopted, though with some modifications, but with a different status, and by Article 4 a
provision was being made of a different category with respect to all other sub‑constitu*tional laws.
Read in this way, there is no inconsistency whatsoever between the two Articles as was suggested in
Dosso's case. As a matter of fact, it is only if we adopt the construction put upon Article 4 in Dosso's
case that an inconsistency between Article 4 and Article 2 is created and it is an accepted principle
that we should lean in favour of a construction that puts a consistent interpretation on the different
parts of a statute.”

S. A. Rahman, J. who wrote a separate judgment, although he concurred in the order proposed by the
majority, too observed as follows:‑

"In Dosso's case, the actual decision of this Court was that fundamental rights as embodied in Chapter
II of the late Constitution, were no longer part of the law of the land, after the promulgation of the
Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958. That question does not fall for determination in the instant
case, in the face of the pre‑emptory provisions of the Martial Law Regulation No. 72 and the fact that
the vires of the Ordinance No. XXIII of 1959 are not being assailed before us. The question is an
important one and not free from difficulty. We did not bear the learned Attorney‑General fully, on this
aspect of the case and if Dosso's case requires re‑consideration, in this respect, the question must be
reserved for decision for a more appropriate occasion.

Some doubts had. therefore, begun to be cast by the Supreme Court, as then constituted, on the
correctness of the decision in Dosso's cave even from 1961, but unfortunately this question was not
brought before this Court in the same concrete form in which it has now come before us, by any one
and since this Court like the Supreme Court of the United States of America strictly confines itself, as
observed by Muhammad Munir. C. 1. himself in the case of the Province of East Pakistan . v. Mehdi All
Khan, at page 407, "to pronounce for or against the litigated right or liability by determination of the
law applicable to the facts though its decision may have repercussions on a statute or a part of it in
respect of future cases," the occasion to reconsider the decision in Dosso's case never arose.

The Courts do not decide abstract hypothetical or contingent questions or give mere declarations in
the air. "The determination of an abstract question of constitutional law divorced from the concrete
facts of a case", as observed by the same learned Chief Justice, "floats in an atmosphere of unreality;
it is a determination in vacuo and unless it amounts to a decision settling rights and obligations of the
parties before the Court it is not an instance of the exercise of judicial power."

There is no duty cast on the Courts to enter upon purely academic exercises or to pronounce upon
hypothetical questions. The Court's judicial function is to adjudicate upon a real and present
controversy which is formally raised before it by a litigant. If the litigant does not choose to raise a
question, however, important it might be, it is not. for the Court to raise it sue motu. The matter thus
remained where it was to this day, as no one raised the question before the Court.

The learned Attorney‑General has placed very strong reliance upon a decision of this Court in the case
of Muhammad Afzal v. The Commissioner, Lahore Division (P L D 1961 S C 401). in which the main
judgment was written by myself, to support his contention that I too had given my clear approval to
the derision in Dosso's case. Again, the question that arose fur decision in that case was as to whether
Martial Law Orders issued by a Zonal Martial Law Adminis*trator, which purported to make provisions
inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution of 1956 and other existing laws, were of any legal
effect and could validly take away the rights of citizens acquired under the latter provisions. The main
argument was built up again upon the language of Articles 2 and 4 of the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order without challenging the validity of the said Order itself and this Court held the impugned Martial
Law Orders to be incompetent to the extent they were repugnant to the existing laws, even under the
Scheme of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, and it is in that ,connection that I stated as
follows:‑

"If as observed in the majority judgment of this Court in the case of the State v. Dosso and another, a
successful revolution is an internationally recognised legal method of changing a Constitution and that
the revolution itself constitutes a new law creating organ whose will thenceforward becomes the law,
then did not the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, which was the expressed will of the
Revolution of October 1958, become thenceforward the fundamental law of the country and an
instrument of a constitutional nature for both the law‑giver as well as those who were to be governed
in accor*dance with its terms?"

It will be noticed that this passage begins with the important word "if" and by no means constitutes an
unqualified acceptance of the principles enunciated in Dosso's case. Indeed it was not necessary for
me in that case to pronounce upon the validity or ,the invalidity of the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order because all that I was attempting to do in that case was to take advantage of the principle
enunciated in Dosso's case and put the Martial Law Administrator himself within the "straight jacket"
of his own legal order which Dosso's case stated that he had created, and it was on that basis that I
held that within the framework of that legal order itself "the law‑giver" himself was bound, if it was a
legal order and, therefore, he could not act outside that legal framework. It is not correct, therefore,
to say that I too gave my apps oval to the majority decision in Dosso's case.

We come next to the case of Ch. Tanbir Ahmad Siddiky v. Government of East Pakistan (PLD 1968 S C
185), on which the learned Attorney‑General has placed strong reliance, for showing that by now the
rule in Dosso's case had become so firmly entrenched as to acquire the status of a stare decisis. He
quotes the observations of Cornelius, C. J. which are as follows:

"The pronouncement of the Supreme Court that writs for enforcement of the Fundamental Rights
under the 1956-Constitution were not competent by reason of the Laws Continuance in Force) Order,
was an interpretation of that Order, which bad effect as a part of that Order. To put it differently, that
legal pronouncement became a part of Martial Law and had the effect that throughout the period that
Martial Law was in operation, a period of over 3½ years during which an enormous number of
executive actions were performed on the basis of laws of origin prior to the Martial Law as well as of
laws made during the period of Martial Law, all in the belief sustained by the view of the Supreme
Court that such actions were immune to challenge on the basis of Fundamental Rights in the
Constitution of 1956.

To hold to the contrary today, if that were possible, would have the effect of disturbing a great many
things done during the period of Martial Law, affecting individuals and institutions and in certain cases
the whole of a Province, which things were valid in the period they were done, and have formed the
basis of further actions by the authorities as well as by the citizens concerned. The period of Martial
Law was governed by its own source of law, namely,‑ the Revolution of the 7th October 1958, and the
actions that were done and brought to completion in that period, in compliance with laws derived from
the said source are all covered by the Martial Law of which the decision in the case of Dosso, as
confirmed in the case of Mehdi Ali Khan, was an essential part. The principle of stare decisis can have
no more direct application than to the judicial interpretation of a major instrument by which the
governance of an entire country was controlled during a limited period, and within the terminal points
of that period. On general grounds, therefore, it is not open to this Court to, review its decision in the
case of Dosso."

In this case again the only question argued was that fundamental rights had become unenforceable by
reason of the provisions of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958. The validity of the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order itself was not challenged but only the correctness of the interpretation
given to its terms in Dosso's case was sought to be re‑agitated. It is only in this connection that the
learned Chief Justice thought that the principles of stare decisis could be legitimately applied to the
interpretation given by the Supreme Court to the provisions of the said Order.

What then is this principle of stare decisis and does it apply to this Court?‑Learned counsel appearing
for the appellants as well as the learned counsel appearing as amicii curiae have, of course, contended
that the principle is not applicable to this Court which is not bound by its earlier decisions. Indeed,
they contend that the Constitution of 1962 and even the earlier Constitution of 1956 had specifically
provided in conformity with the universally accepted principle that the Court of ultimate jurisdiction
must always have the power to review its own decisions (vide Article 62 of the 1962‑Constitution).
Even otherwise it is contended that the rule of stare decisis is merely a rule of expediency and not "a
universal inexorable command". It has many exceptions to it, for, the doctrine cannot be allowed to
become a "dead hand" nor should the law be submerged in "still waters in which there are only
stagnation and depth." It is further pointed out that even the House of Lords of the United Kingdom
has now recognised the wisdom underlying the freedom from the binding force of precedents In the
case of Courts of ultimate jurisdiction. It no longer adheres to this rule and has altered its former
practice under which it considered itself bound by its earlier decisions. [Vide (1966) 1 W L R 1234].

I am not unmindful of the importance of this doctrine but in spite of a Judge's fondness for the written
word and his normal inclination to adhere to prior precedents I cannot fail to recognise that 9t is
equally important to remember that there is need for flexibility in the application of this rule, for law
cannot stand still nor can we become mere slaves of precedents.

As observed in Halsbury's Laws of England, Third Edition, Volume 22 at page 802, paragraph 1690,
"the supreme appellate Court will, however, not shrink from overruling a decision, or series of
decisions, which establish a doctrine plainly outside a statute and outside the common law, when no
title and no contract will be shaken, no person can complain, and no general course of dealing be
altered by the remedy of a mistake; and, where the course of practice is founded upon an erroneous
construction of an Act of Parliament, there is no principle which precludes, at any rate that tribunal,
from correcting the error, although the construction of a statute of doubtful meaning, once laid down
and accepted for a long period of time, ought not to be altered unless the House of Lords can say

positively that it is wrong and productive of inconvenience."

To more or less the same effect is the principle enunciated in the Corpus Juris Secundum, Volume 21,
paragraph 193, in these words :‑

"The rule of stare decisis is not so imperative or inflexible as to preclude a departure therefrom in any
case, but its application must be determined in each case by the discretion of the Court, and previous
decisions should not be followed to the extent that error may be perpetuated and grievous wrong be
the result . . . . . The doctrine of stare decisis cannot be invoked to sustain, as authority, a decision
which is in conflict with the provisions of the state Constitution; or a decision which is in conflict with a
previous statutory enactment to which the decision makes no reference, and. which is made without
reviewing or construing the statute, and* in such a case the statute should be followed rather than
the, decision . . . . . "

Again at paragraph 215 it is opined that‑

"the doctrine of stare decisis cannot control questions involving the construction and interpretation of
the organic law at least where no rule of property is involved, or at least *that the doctrine does not
apply with the same force to *decisions on constitutional questions as to other decisions, and while
previous decisions will not be entirely disregarded and, may, in case of doubt, control the views of the
Court, they will be considered merely as authorities tending to aid in arriving at a proper conclusion,
and not as a rule to be followed without inquiry."

It will thus be seen that the rule of stare decisis does not apply with the same strictness in criminal,
fiscal and constitutional matters where the liberty of the subject is involved or some other grave
injustice is likely to occur by strict adherence to the rule.

Following this principle the House of Lords of the United Kingdom in the case of the Governors of the
Campbell College Belfast v. Commissioner of Valuation for Northern Ireland ((1964) 2 A E R 705) set
aside a decision which had held the field in Northern Ireland for 50 years by ruling that "the doctrine
of stare decisis had but little application " in a case of a fiscal nature, where the decision "was plainly
wrong, and had not been supported before the House."

That was a case of an interpretation of a fiscal provision which bad been followed throughout those 50
years and on the "faith of which businessmen and women, settlors and donors, may have made their
dispositions" but even so the noble Lords felt that there was an equally important principle which,
should not be overlooked, namely, that "where taxes or rates had been illegally demanded and paid
on a clearly wrong construction of a statute justice demands that the illegal impost, however
innocently made, should be terminated unless there is some very good reason to the contrary."

Similarly in the case of the Attorney‑General of the Common*wealth of Australia v. Reginam and
others ((1957) 2 A E R 45 (P C)) the Privy Council reversed a decision given in 1918 by the High Court
of Australia in the case of Waterside Workers Federation v. Alexander (25 C L R 434), although they
were conscious of the fact that "no one can doubt that it is a formidable question, why for a quarter of
a century no litigant has attacked the validity of this obviously illegitimate union?*--Why in
Alexander's case itself was no challenge made?‑How came it that in a series of cases, which were
enumerated in the majority and the dissensient judgments, it was assumed without question that the
provisions now impugned were valid?" Not*withstanding this, they felt that whatever the reason may
be "the question of the applicability of the doctrine of stare decisis to matters of far‑reaching
constitutional importance" would require consideration of the High Court of Australia itself. Thus
indi*cating that the High Court of Australia might in view of the patent illegality discovered by the
Judicial Committee itself wish to reconsider its decision in Alexander's case.

Upon these principles it has become necessary for me now to consider whether the wide principle
enunciated in Dosso's case is so "plainly wrong" that it can be said to be "totally unsustain*able",
because, otherwise, in view of the high esteem I have and have always had for the profound legal
learning and sound judgment of the learned author of the main opinion in Dosso's case I would not
venture to depart from his views.

Learned counsel appearing for the appellants as well as the learned counsel appearing as amicii curiae
have assailed this decision on a number of grounds. Mr. Manzoor Qadir has confined himself to saying
that the legal theory of Hans Kelsen was misread and misapplied, because, the revolution
contemplated by Kelsen was a revolution which completely disintegrated the old legal order and
brought about a permanent ,transformation in the new body politic. Temporary or transitory changes
were not even upon Kelsen's own principles, which clearly postulated the condition of efficacy of the
change as a necessary test, qualified to be classed in the category of a revolution.

Mr. Anwar rejects the theory off‑hand as being totally unacceptable. According to him, if any
grund‑norm was necessary for Pakistan it was to be found in the Objectives Resolution of 1954 which
is a document which still holds the field and each of the successive regimes has attempted to justify
its action on the ground that whatever was happening in the country when it took over was an
attempt to subvert those very objectives and it had to step in merely to bring the country back on the
rails by fulfilling those objectives.

Mr. Brohi is of the view that the fallacy underlying the decision in Dosso's case lies in the fact that it
has accepted a purely legal theory of law as a question of law itself, although it was nothing more
than "a question about law" and no legal judgment could possibly be based on such a purely
hypothetical proposition. He is further of the view that the Court in making the impugned observations
proceeded clearly upon the assumption that (a) the revolution, if any, had succeeded and (b) that its
own authority was derived from the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order. Both these assumptions were
wrong. The question as to whether the revolution, if any, had in fact succeeded in creating an effective
legal order was a question of fact and had to be decided as such objectively. It was not even gone
into. The decision was, therefore, purely an ad hoc decision, which cannot be treated as binding.

Mr. Sharifuddin Peerzada, on the other hand. attacks the decision on a number of grounds which may
be summarised as follows ;

(1) The decision was given in haste and against the principles .of natural justice, because, no
opportunity at all was given to learned counsel appearing for the respondents to argue the contrary.

(2) The decision was vitiated by bias at least in the learned Chief Justice who, as he himself has
subsequently disclosed, had a hand in the drafting of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order (vide
Article of the learned Chief Justice published in the Pakistan Times newspaper on the 11th of
November 1968). It is contend*ed that he should not have sat on this Bench, as he had already
committed himself to granting legal recognition to the Regime and its Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order.

(3) Being a Municipal Court it should not have made a rule of international law regarding recognition
of States the basis of its decision.

(4) The Court's interpretation of Kelsen's doctrine was absolutely incorrect.

(5) In any event, the theory of Kelsen is not a universally accepted theory and should not have been
applied to the circumstances then prevailing in Pakistan.

(6) The doctrine of necessity as a validating factor was not even noticed.

The learned Attorney‑General, as earlier indicated, has made no serious attempt either to justify the
correctness of this decision or to controvert that whatever was done by either late Iskander Mirza or
Field Marshal Ayub Khan was proper and legal. Indeed, he has dubbed them both as "usurpers" and
even gone to the extent of characterising Governor‑General late Ghulam Mohammad as the first "Guy
Fawkes of Pakistan" but his main contention has been that whatever the merits or demerits of their
vagaries Dosso's case had given them legal recognition and that being now the law of the land
propounded by the highest Judicial authority and consistently recognised thereafter must prevail, no
matter whe*ther it "amounts to an invitation to revolution" or "serves as an encouragement to
military adventurers" or "sounds the death‑knell of the rule of law", as suggested by learned counsel
on the other side.

The learned Attorney‑General vigorously maintains that it makes no difference, for, it is now too firmly
established to be altered or departed from whether it be on the principle of "stare decisis", as
observed by Cornelius, C. J. in the case of Tanvir Ahmed, or upon general principles. Hans Kelsen, it is
furthermore contend ed, is not the only legal theorist who thought that the de facto sovereign can also
be regarded in the juridical concept as also the de jute sovereign in certain circumstances. He too
supports the theory that an "abrupt disruption of a legal order" may well be characterised as a
revolution, no matter what the motive or the means employed, peaceful or violent, if it in fact annuls
the existing order and "the annulment is effective." He quotes a passage from Harold, J. Laski's book
on the State in Theory and practice (page 27) to show that the latter too held the view that those
"who control the use of the Armed Forces of the State are in fact the masters of its sovereignty."

Similarly he cites from Garner's Treaties on Political Science and Government (page 155) to maintain
that the "sovereign who succeeds in maintaining his power usually becomes in the course of time the
legal sovereign . . . . . . somewhat as actual pos*session in private law ripens into legal ownership
through prescription."

G. C. Field's Lectures on Political Theory (pages 74‑75) are also referred to by the learned
Attorney‑General to point out that "legal sovereignty is not a separate thing which can be conferred or
constituted in a different way from other kinds of sovereignty. Sovereignty, in any sense, is
constituted by consent, the development of the habit of obedience, and by that alone."

He has also utilized some observations of Dean Roscoe Pound from his magnum opus on
Jurisprudence (Vol. 11, Part 3, page 305), where it has been opined that "in case of an ultimately
successful insurrection the Courts deriving from it would uphold acts of the insurgents from the
beginning and Courts of other countries would do the same"

He has also recounted the story of the American General Cadwaladar, who had flouted Chief Justice
Taney and refused to respond to the writ of habeas corpus issued by him. This action of the General
was, it is said, supported even by President Lincoln on the ground that due to the state of insurrection
then prevailing in the Southern States the President had lawfully authorized the General to suspend
the writ of habeas corpus. The Chief Justice questioned the right of the President to do so. The
President instead of replying to the Chief Justice referred the matter to the Congress which, after
considerable deliberations. "begrudgingly", approved the President's proclamation, out of the high
esteem it had for the President, and legalised his suspen*sion of the writ. But soon thereafter,
realizing the danger of the abuse of that power, passed another law adding provisos to the power of
the President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus even in times of war. Under these provisos even In
times of war the army officers in charge of prisoners were required to supply a list of all non‑military
persons held in detention in military prison to a civilian Court and they could detain them only until
the next civilian grand jury met in the local Court House of that area. If the grand jury did not indict
such a detained person then the local Civil Judge could order the military authorities to bring the man
before the Court for hearing and discharge. (Vide Fribourg's Supreme Court in American History,
pages 76‑82).

While I must compliment the learned Attorney‑General for his great industry in discovering these
extracts, T regret I cannot agree with him that they in any way, support the broad principle sought to
be adumbrated by him. With due respect to the learned Attorney‑General I must point out that the
passages quoted by him do not, when read in their proper context convey the sense which he wishes
to put upon them. The theory that Herold Laski was putting forward was merely this that every State
and every Government must have, of necessity, the legal power to use the armed forces of the State
whenever its authority is threatened. Where it cannot do so "it must either change the law or
abdicate". The purpose here sought to be pointed out was that "the armed forces of the State are
there to protect, so far as may be, its sovereignty from invasion" and "it is the possession of this legal
right to resort to coercion which dis*tinguishes the Government of the State from the Government of
all other associations". Professor Herold Laski was by no means advocating the theory that the
Commander‑in‑Chief of the country who, in fact controls "the use of the armed forces", is in the
ultimate resort the real master of the sovereignty of the State. On the other hand, Laski's thesis
appears to me to be that the control of the armed forces of the State is an essential element of the
sovereignty of the State and that the armed forces are under the command of the State. Once the
State loses that command it becomes ineffective and must either then change the law or abdicate.

Similarly, the passage read from Garner's Political Science and Government occurs in a paragraph
which bears the sub‑heading of "de jure sovereignty". It begins with these very significant words,
namely, that "de jure sovereignty on the other hand has its foundation in law, not in physical power
alone and, the person or body of persons by whom it is exercised can always show s legal right to
rule". It is in this context that he propounded the theory that even a sovereign in actual control must
show a legal right to rule, i. e. his "physical power and mastery ought for rest upon legal rights" and
not that legal rights depends upon physical power and mastery. The de facto sovereign, according to
Garner, could become de jure only "by election or ratification'" by the people. The physical force that
he possesses can never by itself give him the legal right to convert his de facto claim into a de jure
claim. It ii not also unimportant that the paragraph in question from which the citation has been made
by the learned Attorney‑General closes with these meaning*ful words:‑

"There is, as Bryce well observed, a natural and instinctive opposition to submission to power which
rests only on force."

G. C. Field also was only propounding the proposition that ac*tual or de facto sovereignty becomes de
jure by "consent and the development of the habit of obedience", and by that alone. "We begin", says
Field, "to talk about legal sovereignty only when this habit has been definitely established."

Roscoe Pound, as is well known, thinks of the sovereign as "that particular organ or that complex or
system of organs, which exercises its (State's) governmental functions" and with regard to civil war it
is interesting to note that what he has to say is as follows:‑

"A body of citizens may throw off their legal subjection for the time being and set up a new de facto
internal sovereignty.. But if the insurgents are put down, the legal subjection is treated as
uninterrupted. So one may be subject in law and yet not in fact. The law would hold him a subject,
and yet he may have thrown off for a time his habitual obedience."

Internal sovereignty, according to him, therefore, is the aggregate of the powers of internal control
possessed by the ruling organs of the society and under the American system he thinks that the
sovereign is the ultimate repository of power", which can change the Constitution.

None of the learned authors cited, therefore, support the" proposition of the learned Attorney‑General
and it seems to ma that the farthest that these learned authors have gone is to expound that where a
de facto sovereign has, in fact, got his position confirmed by an election or ratified by the people by
habitual obedience over a sufficiently long period of time there alone he can claim to have acquired de

jure sovereignty as well.

Let me now take up for consideration the criticisms levelled against the principles propounded in the
judgment of the then learned Chief Justice in Dosso's case at pages 538 to 540. For this purpose I
shall assume (without admitting) that the impugned observations were not merely obiter dicta, even
though after reading the whole judgment with great care I regret that I have not been able to discover
therein any reference to any argument advanced on behalf of the respondents with regard to the vires
of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, itself. All that I have been able to discover is that it
was sought to be contended that even under its provisions the fundamental rights given by the
Constitution of 1956 to the citizens of this country still survived, particularly since the said Order was
not given retrospective operation. Great reliance was also placed on the provisions of Article 2 of the
said Order which, it was contended, had saved the ‑fundamental rights by providing "that Pakistan
shall be governed as nearly as may be fn accordance with the late Constitution". The learned
Attorney‑General who, as already stated, appeared for one of the respondents in the said case, has
also corroborated the criticism and stated at the Bar of this Court that he was not allowed to argue
this particular question. It also appears that there is no finding in this judgment as regards the
effectiveness of the new regime. The criticism, therefore, that the Court started with certain
assumptions does not appear to be wholly unjustified.

As I have indicated earlier, Martial Law was imposed and the Constitution was abrogated by the then,
President who had himself been appointed under the Constitution of 195‑6, on the 7th of October
1958, and it was be who by his Proclamation of' the 7th of October 1958, abrogated the Constitution,
dismissed the Central and Provincial Governments, dissolved the National Parliament and Provincial
Assemblies, abolished all political parties, provided that until alternative arrangements are made
Pakistan will come under Martial Law and appointed the then Commander‑in‑Chief of the Army as the
Chief Martial Law Administrator. This Proclamation was made in his capacity as President and Head of
the State by invoking in aid his "foremost duty before God and the people of Pakistan to maintain the
integrity of Pakistan". Under this Order, therefore, he continued as President and in that capacity on
the 10th of October 1958, issued the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958. Article 2 of this Order
reads as follows :‑

"2(1) Notwithstanding the abrogation of the Constitution of the 23rd March 1956, hereinafter referred
to as the late Constitution, by the Proclamation and subject to any Order of the President or
Regulation made by the Chief Administrator of Martial Law the Republic, to be known henceforward as
*Pakistan, shall be governed as nearly as may be in accordance with the late Constitution.

(2) Subject as aforesaid all Courts in existence immediately before the Proclamation shall continue in
being and, subject.. further to the provisions of this Order, in their powers and. jurisdictions.

(3) The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding* on all Courts in Pakistan.

(4) The Supreme Court and the High Courts shall have power to issue the writs of habeas corpus,
mandamus, prohibi*tion, quo warrant.. and certiorari.

(5) No writ shall be issued against the Chief Administrator of Martial Law, or the Deputy Chief
Administer‑for of Martial Law, or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction under the authority of
either.

(6) Where a writ has been sought against an authority which has been succeeded by an authority
mentioned in the preceding clause, and the writ sought is a writ provided for in clause (4) of this
Article, the Court notwithstanding that no writ may be issued against an authority so mentioned may
send to that authority its opinion on a question of law raised.

(7) All orders and judgments made or given by the Supreme Court between the Proclamation and the
promulgation of this Order are hereby declared valid and binding on all Courts and authorities in
Pakistan, but saving those orders and judgments no writ or order for a writ issued or made after the
Pro*clamation shall have effect unless it is provided for by this Order, and all applications and
proceedings in respect of any writ which is not so provided for shall abate forthwith."

It will be observed that under these provisions there was no bar to the issuance of a writ of the kinds
mentioned in clause (4) against any person exercising power or jurisdiction under the authority of the
President, who was a distinct and separate superior functionary from the Chief Martial Law
Administrator. The absolute bar was only to the issuance of writs against "the Chief Administrator of
Martial Law or the Deputy Chief Administrator of Martial Law or any person exercising powers and
jurisdiction under the authority of either". Under clause (7) the judgments of the Courts already given
in writ matters were declared to be valid and binding on all Courts and authorities but with regard to
future orders a bar was provided unless the writ was of a kind which had been provided for by the
Order itself, and applications and proceedings in respect of any writ which was not so provided for in
the Order, were to abate.

In Dosso's case the respondents had applied to the High Court for writs of habeas corpus and
certiorari for quashing certain orders issued by the Deputy Commissioner referring certain cases
pending against the respondents therein for trial before the Council‑of‑Elders (Special Jirga) and for
their release from detention. The High Court had granted them those reliefs and appeals against the
said orders filed in the Supreme Court by the State were pending decision. The writs, therefore, were
of the nature which were permitted by clause (4) of Article 2 of the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order, 1958, and were certainly not directed against either the Chief Administrator of Martial Law or
the Deputy Chief Administrator of Martial Law or any person exercising powers and jurisdiction under
the authority of either. Nevertheless, the Court held that by reason of the provisions of clause (7) of
Article 2 all those writs had abated.

If the question of the vires of the Laws (Continuance in .Fore) Order or the validity of the imposition of
the Martial Law had not been raised, it was not necessary for the Court to give a certificate of validity
in that behalf, but the Court thought fit to do so without even noticing that under the theory
pronounced by Hans Kelsen himself efficacy was a pre‑condition to the validity of the acts of a de facto
sovereign. There is nothing in any law or either in Kelsen's book to show that this decision is of a
purely subjective nature or that this too depends upon :he will of the de facto holder of power. In the
circumstances .vas it not incumbent upon the Court to decide this question Objectively before
pronouncing that the de facto holder of power had also become the de jure sovereign and a proper
law‑creating agency. Into this exercise the Court, unfortunately, did no enter. The criticism, therefore,
that the Court started with the basic assumption that the President, who had usurped power and
whose will, it was said, bad become a new law‑creating medium, had acquired effective control by the
habitual obedience rendered to his commands by the citizens of the country over a reasonable period
of time.

The actual facts, on the other hand, disclose a different picture, for, they do show that the very next
day after the publication of the judgment of the Court that individual him*self was placed under arrest
and packed out of the country. Where then was the efficacy of his will to which the Court had already
given legal recognition ?‑He was replaced by a crea*ture of his own creation, namely, the Chief
Administrator of Martial Law who, it has to be pointed out, created no other legal order himself. He did
not abrogate the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, but continued to function thereunder,
although he subsequently assumed also the role of the President.

Even on the theory propounded by the learned Chief Justice himself was this subsequent change also
a successful revolution? If so, by what test, because, on this occasion there was no annulment of any
Constitution or of the grund‑norm, of any kind.. which had been created by President Iskander Mirza?---*What was, we may well ask, the grund‑norm after the deposition of lskandar Mirza himself ?----‑

intricate and difficult questions may arise in considering the questions relating to the validity of the
regime from the day Field Marshal Ayub Khan took over and until his de facto regime received de jure

recognition by his election as President under the Constitution of 1961, but it is unnecessary for our
present purposes to enter into this challenging exercise‑---It will be sufficient for the present to point
out that it does appear to us that the legal recognition given in Dosso's case to what was done by
President Iskander Mirza was, to say the least, premature.

It is also true that the learned Chief Justice In an article published in the Pakistan Times on the 11th
of November 1968, under the heading of "Days I remember" admitted that in spite of the
Proclamation of Martial Law on the 7th of October 1958, he "did not stop the Supreme Court from
functioning", because, he felt, "that the Supreme Court on being properly moved still had the right to
say whether what had happened was legal or Illegal". (The underlining is mine). The next morning,
however, the Zonal Martial Law Administrator of Lahore met him and told him that the Courts,
including the Supreme Court, had lost their jurisdiction but a few hours later he received a summon
from the President to proceed to Karachi where he was told that the intention of the regime was to
keep the existing laws and the jurisdiction of the civil authorities alive. He was then shown a draft of
the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, whereby this intention was sought to be given effect. He
suggested "certain modifications, particularly with refer*ence to the superior Court's powers to issue
writs and valida*tion of the judgments which had been delivered after the Procla*mation". I take it
that these were accepted, for, they do in fact find place in the formal order that was ultimately
promulgated on the 10th of October 1958. According to his own version, even at this time a doubt
arose as to whether there was a President of the country or not but he himself posed the question
"whether the army had been inducted into power by the Presi*dent or whether it had acquired such
power on its own"?--‑*This evidently then silenced the Chief Administrator of Martial Law, for, the
army had, in fact, been called in by the President.

The learned Chief Justice was, therefore, clear about the legal status of the Chief Administrator of
Martial Law and since his interpretation was accepted the Order of 1958 was issued In the name of
the President.

Learned counsel have sought to argue from this that the esteemed Chief Justice was thereby
personally committed to give judicial recognition to the aforesaid Order of 1958 and was, therefore,
disqualified from sitting on the Bench which heard Dosso's case. I am not inclined to agree with this
view, for, having regard to the long experience of the learned Chief Justice as a member of the various
Benches of superior Courts in this country and his vast judicial experience I am certain that he was,
notwithstanding his association in the drafting of the Order, quite capable of keeping an open mind
and expressing his independent judgment. Mere association with the drafting of a law does not
necessarily disqualify a judge from interpreting that law in the light of the arguments advanced before
him.

Nevertheless, with utmost respect to the learned Chief Justice, I do feel that in laying down a novel
juristic principle of such far‑reaching importance he did proceed on the basis of certain assumptions,
namely :‑---

(1) "that the basic doctrines of legal positivism". which he was accepting, were such firmly and
universally accepted doctrines that "the whole science of modern jurisprudence" rested upon them ;

(2) that any "abrupt political change not within the contem*plation of the Constitution" constitutes a
revolution, no matter how temporary or transitory the change, if no one has taken any step to oppose
it ; and

(3) that the rule of international law with regard to the recognition of States can determine the
validity also of the States' internal sovereignty.

These assumptions were, in my humble opinion, not justified. As I have earlier indicated Kelsen's
theory was, by no means, a universally accepted theory nor was it a theory which could claim to have

become a basic doctrine of the science of modern jurisprudence, nor did Kelsen ever attempt to
formulate any theory which "favours totaliterianism".

Professor Julius Stone in his Treatise on the Legal System and Lawyers' Reasoning, 1964 Edition, page
121, observes as follows :‑

"We would defend Kelsen, as vehemently as he himself, against the reproach that his theory favours
totalitarianism. Yet we have to add that the above sins of pride in purity have contributed much to the
confusion which has led leading minds, in perfect good faith, to make such a charge. But for the
over‑weening claim to monopolise both juristic and lawyers' concerns, it would be clear that analytical
jurispru*dence, being only a limited phase of merely juristic concern, could not assume to decide or
influence greatly the mortal struggle between totalitarianism and democracy. It is now clear to the
world from such late publications as What is Justice ? (1957), as it may always have been to his
intimates, that he is a convinced liberal democrat, and that 'purity' in this aspect of his thinking
marches with commitment to freedom as a lawyer‑citizen. We personally, therefore, deplore the
charge, and its echo and re‑echo. Professor Kelsen could help to quiet it by renouncing even ‑more
clearly the impression he long gave that he regards the scope of the pure theory of law as exhausting
the jurist's and the lawyer's concerns."

Kelsen has done so but unfortunately he still continues to be grievously misunderstood. He was only
trying to lay down a pure theory of law as a rule of normative science consisting of "an aggregate or
system of norms". He was propounding a theory of law as a "mere jurists' proposition about law". He
was not attempting to lay down any legal norm or legal norms which are "the daily concerns of
Judges, legal practitioners or administrators"', In his early works this distinction was not made clear
but in 1960 he attempted in his book "Rechtslehre" to clarify the confusion by pointing out, as Julius
Stone observes, "that the propositions of the pure theory of law are mere jurists' propositions about
law and that they do not bind the Judge, in the way in which legal norms bind him". Hs also insisted
throughout that the efficacy of the norm is an essential condition of its recognition in its nomodynamic
aspect and this efficacy must be (a) "by and large" and (b) "in terms of conformity with principles of
society to the norms, and the regular execution of sanctions for non*conformity." But he does not
even now provide us with any guideline as to how his basic norm acquires validity. He frankly admits
that this is a "meta‑legal question and, there*fore, incapable of any clear scientific declaration." Julius
Stone thinks that in attempting to try to demonstrate the legal validity of Kelsen's original
"grand‑norm" subsequently redesignated by Kelsen himself as the "apex‑norm" would be "to try to
hoist oneself by one's own boot‑straps".

Professor Stone observes that in Kelsen's theory "the apex*norm is neither legally valid nor invalid ; it
is a hypothesis. How is the worth of such a hypothesis to be assessed ? Will it depend, for instance, on
the extent to which the norms of the legal system of the particular society can be derived from it ? Or
will it depend on how far the apex‑norm, or a system of norms dependent on it, meet some
extraneous test, such as efficacy or observance of the system as a whole by the society?"

Kelsen's position even now, as I shall presently endeavour to show, is not very clear, and as some
critics seem to think "a whole idea of this basic norm still remains shrouded in mystery". (Vide Modern
Law Review, Vol. XXVI, p. 35).

He sometimes characterises it as a "hypothesia" or a "postu*late" and then again as something
existing purely "in the juristic consciousness" and as nothing more than an "ultimate hypothesis of
positivism". It is, therefore, only a "thought norm" which could hardly be recognised as a legal norm
furnishing a criteria of legal validity in any legal system. To give it the status of a legal norm or of a
legal rule was thus, in my opinion, unjustified.

Kelsen in his attempt to evolve a pure science of law as distinguished from a natural science attached
the greatest importance to keeping law and might apart. He did not lay k down the proposition that
the command of the person in autho*rity is a source of law. He, as Professor Leuterpacht observe in
the Modern Theories of Law at page 117, considered that the command was only "a condition which

the law posits .for the creation of duties of other persons just as the private agree*ment is a condition
for the validation of a more general rule of law relating to the observance of contract . . . . . . In both
cases the expression of will‑as commanded or as agreed upon*-constitutes a concretization of the
general rule of law."

He rebelled against the earlier conception or theories which put the State above the law and the most
conspicuous of his theories was the "doctrine of the identity of a State and law". He considered the
State merely as "a normative ordering co*extensive with the normative ordering of the legal system".
It was, by no means, his purpose to lay down any rule of law to the effect that every person who was
successful in grabbing power could claim to have become also a law‑creating agency. His purpose was
to recognise that such things as revolutions do also happen but even when they are successful they do
not acquire any valid authority to rule or annul the previous 'grand‑norm' until they have themselves
become a legal order by habitual obedience by the citizens of the country. It is not the success of the
revolution, therefore, that gives it legal validity but the effectiveness it acquires by habitual
submission to it from the citizens. The initial hypothesis, if a hypothesis is necessary, therefore, still
remains, even under the theory of Kelsen, the ultimate will of the people as manifested by their
habitual submission and not, as suggested in Dosso's case, the success of the revolution.

Kelsen's attempt to justify the' principle of effectiveness from the standpoint of International Law
cannot also be justified, for, it assumes "the primacy of International Law over National Law." In doing
so he has, to my mind, overlooked that for c the purposes of International Law the legal person is the
State and not the community and that in International Lave there is no "legal order" as such. The
recognition of a State under International Law has nothing to do with the internal sovereignty of the
State, and this kind of recognition of a State must not be confused with the recognition of the Head of
a State or Government of a State. An individual does not become the Head of a State through the
recognition of other States but through the municipal law of his own State. The question of recognition
of a Government from the point of view of Inter*national Law becomes important only when a change
in the form of Government also involves a break in the legal continuity of the State or where the
question arises as to whether the new Government has a reasonable expectancy of permanence so as
to be able to claim to represent the State (Vide Oppenheim's International Law, Vol. I, page 127).

Thus where there is no break in the legal continuity of the State itself, no question of recognition of an
internal Government of a State arises, although according to international practice whenever a new
Head of a State assumes office the other States are as a matter of courtesy "notified and usually
recognise the new Head by some formal act as a message of congratulation". (Oppenheim, Vol. I,
page 126). In this view of the matter I cannot find any cogent reason for giving any primacy to
Inter*national Law over national law. So far as the former is concerned, even Hans Kelsen himself was
in difficulty in finding a grand‑norm for it.

I am also unable to agree with the learned Chief Justice that upon the principles of International Law if
the territory and the people remain substantially the same there is "no change in the corpus or
international entity of the State and the revolutionary Government and the new State are, according
to International Law, the legitimate Government and the valid Constitution of the State". With great
respect I must point out that this proposition does not find support from any principle of
Inter*national Law. According to Oppenheim's view as propounded in his book on International Law if
the revolutionary Government is ineffective and or has no "reasonable expectancy of permanence"
and/or does not "enjoy the acquiescence of the population", then the international community may
well refuse to recognise it, even though its territorial integrity remains unchanged and its people
remain substantially the same.

With the utmost respect, therefore, I would agree with the criticism that the learned Chief Justice not
only misapplied the doctrine of Hans Kelsen, but also fell into error in thinking that it was a generally
accepted doctrine of modern jurisprudence. Even the disciples of Kelsen have hesitated to go as far as
Kelsen had gone.

In any event, if a grund‑norm is necessary for us I do not have to look to the Western legal theorists
to discover one. Our own grund‑norm is enshrined in our own doctrine that the legal sovereignty over
the entire universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the authority exercisable by the people within

the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust. This is an immutable and unalterable norm which was
clearly accepted in the Objectives Resolution passed by the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan on the
7th of March 1949. This Resolution has been described by Mr. Brohi as the "corner stone of Pakistan's
legal edifice" and recognised even by the learned Attorney‑General himself "as the bond which binds
the nation" and as a document from which the Constitution of Pakistan "must draw its inspiration".
This has not been abrogated by any one so far, nor has this been departed or deviated from by any
regime, military or Civil. Indeed, 9t cannot be, for, it is one of the fundamental principles enshrined in
the Holy Qur'an;

Say, 'U Allah, Lord of sovereignty. Thou givest sovereignty to whomsoever Thou pleasest ; and Thou
takest away sovereignty from whomsoever Thou pleasent. Thou exaltest whomsoever Thou pleasest
and Thou abasest whomsoever Thou pleasest. (Pt. 3, Ch. 3, Al 'Imran, Ay, 27.)

The basic concept underlying this unalterable principle of sovereignty is that the entire body politic
becomes a trustee for the discharge of sovereign functions. Since in a complex society every citizen
cannot personally participate in the performance of the trust, the body politic appoints State
functionaries to discharge these functions on its behalf and for its benefit, and bas the right to remove
the functionary so appointed by it if he goes against the law of the legal sovereign, or commits any
other breach of trust or fails to discharge his obligations under a trust. The functional Head of the
State is chosen by the community and has to be assisted by a Council which must hold its meetings in
public view and remain accountable to public. It is under this system that the Government becomes a
Government of laws and not of men, for, no one is above the law. It is this that led Von Hammer, a
renowned orientalist, to remark that under the Islamic system "the law rules through the utterance of
justice, and the power of the Governor carries out the utterance of it."

This trust concept of Government filtered into Europe through Spain and even as early as 1685 John
Locke rejected Hobbes' leviathan and propounded the theory that sovereignty vested in the people
and they had the right not only to decide as to who should govern them but also to lay down the
manner of Govern*ment which they thought to be best for the common good. Government was,
therefore, according to Locke, essentially a moral trust which could be forfeited if the conditions of the
trust were not fulfilled by the trustee or trustees, as the case may be.

The trustees under this concept of ours are referred to as "those who are in authority among you" (Pt.
4, Ch. 4, Ay, 60; Al‑Nisa, p. 207) which again negates the possibility of absolute power being vested in
a single hand, for, the reference as clearly to a plurality of persons and to an authority properly
constituted by law.

Upon this analysis, I am, with the utmost respect for the then learned Chief Justice, unable to resist
the conclusion that he erred both in interpreting Kelsen's theory and applying the same to the facts
and circumstances of the case before him. The principle enunciated by him is, in my humble opinion,
wholly unsustainable, and I am duty bound to say that it cannot bet treated as good law either on the
principle of stare decisis or even otherwise.

This disposes of the arguments of the learned counsel on both sides relating to the principle
enunciated in Dosso's case. Unfettered by this decision I propose now to judge the validity of the
events that took place on and from the 24th of March 1969. On the 24th of March 1969, Field Marshal
Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of Pakistan, wrote a letter to the Commander‑in‑Chief of
the army expressing his profound regret for coming to the conclusion that "all civil administration and
constitutional authority in the country has become ineffective" and admitting after reciting the
unhappy state of events that had taken place in the country earlier, that "it is beyond the capacity of
the civil Government to deal with the present complex situation, and the defence forces must step in."
In these circumstances, he thought, that there was no option left for him but "to step aside and leave
it to the defence force of Pakistan, which today represent the only effective and legal instrument, to
take over full control of the affairs of the country", and finally called upon the Commander‑in‑Chief to
do the needful in the following words :‑

"It is your legal and constitutional responsibility to defend* the country not only against external
aggression but also to save it from internal disorder and chaos. The nation expects you to discharge
this responsibility to preserve the security and integrity of the country and to restore normal, social,
economic and administrative life."

This was followed by a Broadcast over the Radio network at 7‑15 p. m., of the 25th of March 1969
which again after narrating the events which had led him to this conclusion, concluded with a parting
request to his countrymen "to appreciate the delicate situation and assist your brethren in the defence
forces in every conceivable manner to maintain law and order."

There was nothing either 'in this letter or in this broadcast to show that he was appointing General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan as big successor‑in‑office or was giving him any authority to abrogate
the Constitution which he had himself given to the country in 1962. Both these documents merely
called upon the Commander‑in‑Chief of the army to discharge his legal and con*stitutional
responsibility not only to defend the country against external aggression but also to save it from
internal disorder and chaos. He did not even proclaim martial law. Nevertheless, the
Commander‑in‑Chief on the very same day, namely, the 25th of March 1969, on his own proclaimed
Martial Law throughout the length and breadth of. Pakistan and assume the powers of the Chief
Martial Law Administrator. He also abrogated the Constitution, dissolved the National and Provincial
Assemblies and declared that all persons holding office as President, members of the President's
Council, Ministers, Governors of Provinces and members of their Council of Ministers shall cease to
hold office with immediate effect. Existing laws and Courts were, however, preserved with the proviso
that no writ or other order shall be issue against the Chief Martial Law Administrator or any person
exercising powers or jurisdiction under the authority of the Chief Martial Law Administrator.

Although by the Proclamation of Martial Law the office of President had ceased to exist yet the General
by another Proclamation of the 31st of March 1969, purported to assume the office of President of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan with retrospective effect from the 25th of March 1969. Thereafter, only on
the 4th of April 1969 a Provisional Constitution Order was enacted whereby the Constitution of 1962,
was by and large restored, and it was provided that the country was to be governed as nearly as may
be in accordance with its terms subject to the Proclamation of Martial Law and subject to any
Regulation or Order that may be made from time to time by the Chief Martial Law Administrator (Vide
Article 3(1)).

The office of President was reintroduced by clause (2) of the same Article in the following terms :‑

"The Chief Martial Law Administrator shall be the President of Pakistan hereinafter referred to as the
President, and shall perform all functions assigned to the President of Pakistan by and under the said
Constitution or by or under any law."

This clearly indicated that the President was a subordinate functionary created by the Chief Martial
Law Administrator, although he was himself to hold the same office, because, the powers of the
President were limited to performing the functions assigned to him under the abrogated Constitution
or under any law. By the other clauses almost all the fundamental rights were taken away and the
Courts were debarred from issuing any order against any Martial Law Authority. Power was given to
the President by Article 4 to issue Ordinances but provisions in law providing for reference of a
detention order to an advisory Board were declared to be of no effect by Article 7 (2), and by Article 8
the President was also given the power to make orders for making such provisions "including
constitutional provisions", as he may deem fit for the administration of the affairs of the State.

The first question, therefore, that arises is as to whether General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan acted
legally in declaring Martial Law, abrogating the Constitution, making new constitu*tional provisions
and assuming the office of President It is clear that under the Constitution of 1962 Field Marshal
Muhammad Ayub Khan had no power to hand over power to anybody. Under Article 12 of that
Constitution he could resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker of the
National Assembly and then under Article 16 as soon as the office of President fell vacant the Speaker

of the National Assembly had to take over as the acting President of the country and an election had
to be held within a period of 90 days to fill the vacancy. Under Article 30 the President could also
proclaim an emergency if the security or economic life of Pakistan was threatened by internal
disturbances beyond the power of a Provincial Government to control and I will assume for the
present purposes that he could also proclaim Martial Law if the situation was not controllable by the
Civil administration. It is difficult however, to appreciate under what authority a Military Commander
could proclaim Martial Law. Even in 1958 the Martial Law was proclaimed by the President. In my
view, the Military Commander had no power also to abrogate the Constitution, although the learned
Attorney‑General has contended that the Proclamation of Martial Law by its own intrinsic force gave
him the right to do so. even apart from anything said in Dosso's case.

This argument necessitates an examination into the nature and scope of Martial Law itself. Does the
imposition of Martial Law ipso facto annul and abrogate everything and give the Military Commander
the power to do anything he likes ?-‑Is Martial Law synonymous with military rule within the territorial
limits of a national entity ?‑ Is the imposition of. Martial Law necessarily a coup d'etat or a revolution
disintegrating the legal order itself?‑Does the imposition of Martial Law absolve the Military
Commander from the oath or affirmation that he takes under the Army Act at the time of his
appointment as an officer to "be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Constitution and the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan ?"

Martial Law, as pointed out by Sir William Holds-worth in his Article published in the Law Quarterly
Review, Vol. 18, page 117, in England originally meant the law administered by the Court of the
Constable and Marshal who had "jurisdiction over heraldry over words spoken to the disparagement of
men of honour, and over contracts relating to war made out of the realm." Later they also acquired
jurisdiction over a case of death or murder com*mitted beyond the sea and over the offences and
miscarriages of soldiers contrary to the laws and rules of the army. The Courts of Constable and
Marshal, however, disappeared in course of time and the Marshal's jurisdiction, it appears, is now
confined to merely some formal matters relating to pedigrees, escutcheons pennons and
coat‑armours.

Martial Law, in the present times in England, has acquired various senses. In its original sense it is
perhaps now only identifiable in the law relating to the enforcement of discipline in the forces at home
and abroad. In this sense this branch of Martial Law is now better known as "military law" and is in
time of peace enforced under various statutes, such as the Army Act, the Navy Act and the Air Force
Act. It derives its authority from these statutes passed by the civil law‑making bodies.

In International law Martial Law means the powers of a military commander in war time in enemy
territory as part of the jus belli. In this sense as the Duke of Wellington once said in the House of
Lords it is "neither more nor less than the will of the General who commands the army." (Hansard,
Vol. CXV, Col. 880).

Can Martial law in this form be exercised within the country ?

The position in England today, as mentioned in Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 7, Third Edition, page
260, is as follows;--

"The Crown may not issue commissions in time of peace to try civilians by martial law; but when a
state of actual war, or of insurrection riot, or rebellion amounting to war, exists, the Crown and its
officers may use the amount of force necessary fn the circumstances to restore order, and this use of
force is sometimes termed martial law. When once this state of actual war exists the civil Courts have
no authority to call in question the actions of the military authorities; but it is for the civil Courts to
decide, if their jurisdiction is invoked. whether a state of war exists which justifies the application of
martial law. The powers, such as they are, of the military authorities cease and those of the civil
Courts are resumed ipso facto with the termination of the state of war; and, in the absence of an Act
of Indemnity the civil Courts may inquire into the legality of anything done during the state of war;
even if there is an Act of Indemnity couched in the usual terms, malicious acts will not be protected."

Under the Constitution of France, however, there is a proce*dure available for a "Declaration of a
State of Siege", under which the authority vested in the civil power for the maintenance of order and
police passes entirely to the army (autorite militaire), in consequence of tumult or insurrection in any
part of the country.

On the proclamation of such a state of siege the constitutional guarantees become suspended and the
Government of the affected area is temporarily placed under the control of the military.

"Martial Law" in this sense, namely, the suspension of the ordinary law and the temporary
Government of a country or a part of it by the military is, according to A. V. Dicey (vide Law of the
Constitution, page 287), "utterly unknown to the law of England", for, it has nothing equivalent to the
French "declaration of State of siege".

This does not, however, exclude the possibility of the armed forces being employed, even under the
Laws of England, for the suppression of riots, insurrection and rebellion, but in this sense, according to
Dicey, Martial Law is just "a name for the common law right of the Crown and its servants to repel
force by force in the case of invasion, insurrection, riot or generally of any violent resistance to the
law." He considers this right to be "essential to the very existence of orderly Government" and, as
being as such "most assuredly recognised in the most ample manner by the law of England." This
right has, however, according to him, "no special connection with the existence of an armed force,"
but pertains to the right of the Crown to put down breaches of peace for which purpose he may call
upon any subject, whether civilian or soldier, to assist "as a matter of legal duty".

So far as England is concerned, no occasion has arisen to enforce even this type of common law
martial law in the country since the civil wars of the Seventeenth Century, but martial law has been
enforced in this form during the past century in South Africa, Southern Ireland, Palestine and parts of
British India. Nevertheless, even in such cases the degree of freedom given to the military to exercise
force has varied with the circumstances of each case. The test of interference always has been the
necessity of performing the duty of repelling force and restoring order. In exceptional circumstances,
the military may in such eventualities also find it necessary to set up Military Tribunals to try civilians
and offenders may even be condemned to death but in every case the action taken has to be judged
by the test of necessity. The Tribunals so set up are neither judicial bodies nor Courts Martial under
the Army, Navy or the Air Force Acts but are merely bodies set up to advise the Military Commander
as to 'the action he should take.

The English Courts also maintain that it is not the proclam*ation of Martial Law which justifies the use
of force but rather the events which have created a situation in which the use of force in this form has
become justified. Blackstone in his Commentaries, Vol. I, page 381, describes this kind of Martial Law
"only as temporary exerescences bred out of the distemper of the State".

From the above it is clear that we must distinguish clearly between Martial Law as a machinery for the
enforcement of internal order and Martial Law as a system of military rule of a conquered or invaded
alien territory. Martial Law of the first category is normally brought in by a proclamation issued under
the authority of the civil Government and it can displace the civil Government only where a situation
has arisen in which it has become impossible for the civil Courts and other civil authorities to function.
The imposition of Martial Law does not of its own force require the closing of the civil Courts or the
abrogation of the authority of the civil Government. The maxim inter armes leges silent applies in the
municipal field only where a situation has arisen in which it has become impossible for the Courts to
function, for, on the other hand, it is an equally well‑established principle that where the civil Courts
are sitting and civil authorities are functioning the establishment of Martial Law cannot be justified.
The validity of Martial Law is, in this sense, always a judicial question, for, the Courts have always
claimed and have in fact exercised the right to say whether the necessity for the imposition of Martial
Law in this limited common law sense existed.

In this connection it may be worthwhile quoting a passage from the opinion of the Earl of Halsbury in
the case of Tilonko v. Attorney‑General of Natal (1907 A C 93) which came up as an application for
special leave to appeal by Tilonko who had been indicted before a Court Martial, sitting under a
declaration of Martial Law, for the crimes of sedition and public violence. He objected to the
jurisdiction of the Military Court on the ground that he was not a military man and had not been taken
in the field of battle, as he had never taken up arms against the Government. He also questioned the
validity of the imposition of Martial Law on the ground that the state of the country was not such as to
justify it. The Government on the other hand claimed that the Court could net go behind the
Proclamation. But the Noble Earl observed :

"The notion that martial law exists by reason of the pro*clamation‑an expression which the learned
counsel has more than once used‑is an entire delusion. The right to administer force against force in
actual war does not depend upon the proclamation of martial law at all. It depends upon the
ques*tion whether there is war or not. If there is war, there is the right to repel force by force but it is
found convenient and decorous, from time to time, to authorize what are called Courts to administer
punishments, and to restrain by acts of repression the violence that is committed in time of war,
instead of leav*ing such punishment and repression to the casual action of per*sons acting without
sufficient consultation, or without sufficient order or regularity in the procedure in which things alleged
to have been done are proved . . . . . But the question whether war existed or not may, of course,
from time to time be a ques*tion of doubt, and if that had been the question in this case, it is possible
that some of the observations of the learned counsel with regard to the period of trial, and the course
that has been pursued, might have required consideration"

This establishes beyond doubt that the Courts in England have always claimed the right in case of
doubt to decide as to whether a state of war or insurrection exists which can justify the imposition of
Martial Law.

Similarly in the case of Rex v. Allen ((1921) 21 R 241) the question arose for consideration whether
Allen, a civilian, arrested after the proclamation of Martial law in Ireland, within the proclaimed area,
in possession of arms and ammunition, was rightly convicted by a Military Court. The Chief Justice
specifically formulated and dealt with, amongst others, the two following questions ;

(1) Was there a state of war in the area included in the Lord Lieutenant's proclamation justifying the
application of Martial Law ? and

(2) Could the military Court act having regard to the fact that the Courts of justice in the area were
open?

On the first question the Court, after going into evidence, came to the conclusion that at the time of
the proclamation a State of war did actually exist and continued to exist at the time of the arrest of
John Allen. On the next question too, after an exhaustive review of all earlier decisions, it found that
when the "regular Courts were open so that criminals might be delivered over to them to be dealt with
according to the ordinary law there was not any right in the Crown to adopt any other course or
proceeding" bat relying on an earlier decision of the Privy Council in the case of Ex parte: Marias
(1902 A C 109 ) held that where a system of guerilla warfare had come to be adopted by the rebels it
could not be said that the "Courts were able to sit for all purposes" and to discharge their ordinary
functions without hindrance.

In saying so they by‑passed an earlier decision of the same Court in Wolfe Tone's case ((1798) 27 St.
Tr. 614) where, according to Dicey (p. 294), the Court granted a writ of habeas corpus to Wolfe Tone
who had admittedly participated in the French invasion of Ireland and thus stopped his execution
ordered by a military Court.

The American view, as given in the Corpus Juris, Secundum, Vol. 93 at page 117, is clearly to the
same effect that "the validity of Martial Law is always a judicial decision."

The American Courts from the case of Ex parte : Milligan (4 Wallace 121) decided in 1866 have
consistently maintained that "Martial rule can never exist where the Courts are open, and in the
proper and unobstructed exercise of their jurisdiction." (Vide Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States by Chester James Antieau).

The case of R. S. Sterling, Governor of the State of Texas v. E. Constantin (77 U S S C R 375 (L.
Edn.)) also makes interesting reading. In this case the District Court of the United States for the
Eastern District of Texas had passed an interlocutory order prohibiting the Governor, the
Adjutant‑General and the Commanding Officer of the Military District from enforcing their military or
executive orders regulating or restricting the pro*duction of petroleum under a proclamation of Martial
Law. The Supreme Court went into the question in detail on evidence first to consider as to whether
there was a state of war or not and as to whether the Military Courts could adjudicate upon the rights
of civilians when the ordinary Courts were functioning, and came to the conclusion that there was "no
room for doubt that there was no military necessity which, from any point of view, could be taken to
justify the action of the Governor in attempting to limit complainants' oil production, otherwise lawful
..... There was no exigency which justified the Governor in attempting to enforce by executive or
military order the restriction which the District Judge has restrained pending proper enquiry. If it be
assumed that the Governor was entitled to declare a state of insurrection and to bring military force to
the aid of civil authority, the proper use of that power in this instance was to maintain the Federal
Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction and not to attempt to override It; to aid in making its process
effective and not to nullify it, to remove, and not to create, obstructions to the exercise by the
complainants of their rights as judicially declared".

From this examination of the authorities I am driven to the conclusion that the Proclamation of Martial
Law does not by itself involve the abrogation of the civil law and the functioning of the civil authorities
and certainly does not vest the Commander of the Armed Forces with the power of abrogating the
funda*mental law of the country. It would be paradoxical indeed if such a result could flow from the
invocation in the aid of a State of any agency set up and maintained by the State itself for its own
protection from external invasion and internal disorder. If the argument is valid that the proclamation
of the Martial Law by itself leads to the complete destruction of the legal order, then the armed forces
do not assist the state in suppressing disorder but actually create further disorder, by disrupting the
entire legal order of the state. I cannot, therefore, agree with the learned Attorney‑General that the
proclamation of Martial Law by itself must necessarily give the Commander of the armed forces the
power to abrogate the Constitution, which he is bound by his oath to defend.

If this be so, then from where did General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan acquire the right to assume
control of the reins of Government? Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan did not appoint him as his
successor by his letter of the 24th March 1969. He merely called upon him to perform his
"constitutional and legal duty to restore order" in the country. If this was his authority, then the only
authority he got was to restore order and nothing more.

Even the imposition of Martial Law by his proclamation is of doubtful validity, because the
proclamation should have come from the civil authorities and it was only then that under the
proclamation the Commander of the armed forces could have moved into action. I am not aware of
any document or of any provision in any law which gives the Commander of the armed forces the right
to proclaim Martial Law, although I am prepared to concede that he has like all other loyal citizens of
the country a bounden duty to assist the State, when called upon to do so. If the magnitude of the
insurrection is so great that the Courts and the civil administration are unable to function, the military
may exercise all such powers that may be necessary to achieve their objective and in doing so may
even set up Military Tribunals to promptly punish wrong‑doers but this, whether done throughout the
country or in a restricted area within the country, merely temporarily suspends the functioning of the
civil Courts and .the civil administration. As soon as the necessity for the exercise of the military
power is over, the civil administration must, of necessity, be restored, and assume its normal role.

It is not without significance that after the so‑called imposition of Martial Law in 1969 the Martial Law

Authorities had no occasion to fire even a single shot and found the conditions so normal that the civil
administration never ceased to function and all the Courts continued to sit for all purposes. In fact the
situation was so normal that within a few days the reality had to be accepted and even the
Constitution was brought back except in so far as it had been purported to be altered by the creation
of the office of President and the assumption of that office by the Chief Martial Law Administrator.
Protection was also purported to be given to the acts of all Martial Law Administrators and their
subordinates acting under their orders to save them from the consequences of their other*wise illegal
acts. If Martial Law was by itself a sufficient legal cover then why was this special protection
necessary.

This country was not a foreign country which had been invaded by any foreign army with General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan at its head nor was it an alien territory which had been occupied by the
said army. The question of imposition of "military rule" as an incident of jus bells of international law
could not, in the circumstances, possibly have arisen. The only form of Martial Law, therefore, that
could possibly have been imposed in this country, assuming that such a state of large scale disorder
had come to prevail in the country as was suggested by Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan in his
letter of the 24th of March 1969, was a Martial Law of the kind which could be (imposed under the
English common law and was imposed by the British from time to time in 1919 in Amritsar, Lahore
and Gujranwala, in 1921 in the areas inhabited by the Moplas, in 1930 in Sholapur, in 1942 In areas
occupied by Hurs in Sind and in 1953 in Lahore. Under these Martial Laws there was, of course, no
question of abrogation of any Constitution or of the introduction of military rule in supersession of the
civil adminis*tration normally functioning in other parts of the country.

Looked at, therefore, either from the constitutional point of view or the Martial Law point of view
whatever was done in March 1969, either by Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan or General Agha
Muhammad Yahya Khan was entirely without any legal foundation. It was not even a revolution or a
military coup d'etat in any sense of those terms. The Military Commander did not take over the reins
of Government by force nor did he oust the constitutional President. The constitutional President out
of his own free will and accord in response to the public's demand, stepped aside and called upon the
Military Commander to restore law and order, as he was bound to do both under the law and under
the Constitution. On the stepping aside of the Constitutional Presi*dent the constitutional machinery
should have automatically come into effect and the Speaker should have taken over as Acting
Presi*dent until fresh elections were held for the choice of a successor. The political machinery would
then have moved according to the Constitution and the National and Provincial Assemblies would have
taken steps to resolve the political disputes, if any, if the Military Commander had not by an illegal
order dissolved them. The Military Commander, however, did not allow the constitutional machinery to
come into effect but usurped the functions of Government and started issuing all kinds of Martial Law
Regulations, Presidential Orders and even Ordinances.

It was in this state of affairs that the nature and scope of the Martial Law imposed in 1969 first came
up for consideration before the Lahore High Court in the case of Mir Hassan and another v. The State
(P L D 1969 Lah. 786). The question that fell to be decided there was as to whether the transference
of certain criminal cases; during the pendency of applications under section 561‑A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure in the High Court‑; in exercise of powers assumed under Martial Law Regulation
No. 42, promulgated during the pendency of the said cases, was valid or not and as to whether the
High Court had jurisdiction to enquire into the question of the validity of such transfer. A Full Bench of
the High Court, after an exhaustive review of the opinions of jurists and the relevant law on the
subject, came to the conclusion that the Martial Law imposed in 1969 was of the kind described by
English authors as the Martial Law which can be imposed in exercise of the common law right vested
in a State to suppress disorder and insurrection, and it was not of the type of military rule which can
be enforced in an alien country by an invading or occupying army. The learned Judge, who delivered
the main judgment, after examining the provisions of the letter of Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub
Khan, the proclamation issued by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan and the Provisional
Constitution Order promulgated on the 4th of April 1969, came to the conclusion that the "Martial Law
was not imposed by the Chief Martial Law Administrator after having wrested power from the
constitutional Government by force". In the circumstances, upon the public declarations of Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan and General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan themselves there was
nothing to suggest that "the existing machinery for dispensing justice was found wanting or that it
was to be subject to curbs or that a state of affairs was to be brought about in which the will of the
Martial Law Commander was to be imposed." I entirely approve of these observations, for they
conform with my own conclusions which I have expressed earlier and, therefore. There can be no
question that the military rule sought to be imposed upon the country by General Agha Muhammad
Yahya Khan was entirely Illegal.

Incidentally It may also be pointed out here that this particular aspect of the question was not
considered in Dosso's case and, as such, the principles therein laid down did not debar the High Court
from going into this question. The High Court was fully entitled to consider whether what happened in
1969 was either a revolution or a coup d'etat within the meaning in which they were considered in
Dosso's case.

The judgment of the High Court in the above‑mentioned case was not challenged by the then regime
by any appeal to this Court but it resorted to the device of nullifying its effect by promulgating a
Presidential Order called the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order, 1969. This was
pub*lished in the Gazette, Extraordinary of Pakistan on the 30th of June 1969.

Since the validity of this Order has been called in question before us it is necessary that both this
Order and the Provisional Constitution Order of the 4th April 1969, should be set out herein In
extenso:‑

I. PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER, 1969

"In pursuance of the Proclamation of the 25th March 1969, and of all powers enabling him in that
behalf, the Chief Martial Law Administrator is pleased to make and promulgate the following Order:‑

1.‑ (1) This Order may be called the Provisional Constitution Order, 1969.

(2) It shall come into force at once and be deemed to have taken effect immediately upon the making
of the Proclamation on the 25th day of March 1969, hereinafter referred to as the Proclamation.

(3) It extends to the whole of Pakistan.

2. Save as otherwise provided in this Order, the provisions of this Order shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of the Proclamation and shall be read and construed accordingly.

3.‑(1) Notwithstanding the abrogation of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan brought
into force on the 8th day of June 1962, hereinafter referred to as the said Constitution, by the
Proclamation and subject to any Regula*tion or Order made, from time to time, by the Chief Martial
Law Administrator, the State of Pakistan, shall, except as otherwise provided in this Order, be
governed as nearly as may be in accordance with the said Constitution.

(2) The Chief Martial Law Administrator shall be the President of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to as
the President, and shall perform all functions assigned to the President of Pakistan by or under the
said Constitution or by or under any law.

(3) Paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 9, 13, 14, 15 and 17 of the Fundamental Rights set out in Chapter I of
Part II of the said Constitution shall stand abrogated and all proceedings pending in any Court, in so
far as they are for the enforcement of those Rights shall abate.

(4) No judgment, decree, writ, order or process whatsoever shall be made or issued by any Court or
tribunal against the Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator or
any Martial Law Authority exercising powers or jurisdiction under the authority of either.

4.‑(1) An Ordinance promulgated by the President or by the Governor of a Province shall not be
subject to the limitation as to its duration prescribed in the said Constitution.

(2) The Provisions of clause (1) shall also apply to an Ordinance which was in force ‑immediately
before the issue of the Proclamation.

5. No Court, tribunal or other authority shall call or permit to be called in question‑

(a) the Proclamation;

(b) any Order made in pursuance of the Proclamation or any Martial Law Regulation or Martial Law
Order; or

(c) any finding, sentence or order of a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court.

6.‑(1) No appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence of a High
Court !n criminal proceedings except when the High Court‑

(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death or
to transportation for life; or

(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any Court subordinate to its authority, and has
in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him as afore. said; or

(c) certifies that the case involves substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the said
Constitution; or

(d) has imposed any punishment on any person for contempt of the High Court.

(2) Save as provided in clause (1), the Supreme Court, a High Court and all other Courts and tribunals
shall have and exercise the same powers and jurisdiction as they had immediately before the issue of
the Proclamation.

7.‑(1) Nothing in this Order or in any law shall prejudice the operation of any Martial Law Regulation
made by the Chief Martial Law Administrator or by any person having authority from him to make
Martial Law Regulations and where any Ordinance made under Article 4 or any other law is repugnant
to such Regulation, the Regulation shall prevail.

(2) Any provision 9n any law providing for the reference of a detention order to an Advisory Board
shall be of no effect.

8. The President may, by Order, make such provisions, including constitutional provisions, as he may
deem fit for the administration of the affairs of the State.

A. M. YAHYA KHAN,
General,
Chief Martial Law Administrator,
4th April 1969. Pakistan."

II. JURISDICTION OF COURTS (REMOVAL OF DOUBTS) ORDER, 1969 "No. F. 24 (1)/69‑Pub.‑The
following order made by the President is hereby published for general information:‑

THE JURISDICTION OF COURTS (REMOVAL OF DOUBTS) ORDER, 1969
President's Order No. 3 of 1969

Whereas doubts have arisen as to whether the Supreme Court pr g High Court has power to issue any
writ, order, notice or' other process to or against a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court,
or in relation to any proceedings of, or any jurisdiction exercised by, any such Military Court, or any
Martial Law Authority;

And whereas it is necessary to remove such doubts;

Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the 25th day of March 1969, and in exercise of all
powers enabling him fn that behalf, the President and Chief Martial Law Administrator is pleased to
make and promulgate the following Order:‑‑

1.‑(1) This Order may be called the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order, 1969.

(2) It shall come into force at once and shall be deemed to have taken effect on the 25th day of March
1969.

2. This Order shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Provisional Constitution
Order, or any Martial Law Regulation, or any other law for the time being in force.

3.‑(1) No Court, tribunal or other authority, including the Supreme Court and a High Court, shall‑---

(a) receive or entertain any complaint, petition, application or other representation whatsoever
against, or in relation to the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by, any Special Military Court or
Summary Military Court, or any Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction
derived from Martial Law Authority;

(b) call or permit to be called in question in any manner whatsoever any finding, sentence, order,
proceeding or other action of, by or before a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court or any
Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law
Authority;

(c) issue or make any writ, order, notice or other process whatsoever to or against, or in relation to
the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court, or
any Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law
Authority.

(2) Any decision given, judgment passed, writ, order, notice or process issued or made, or thing done
in contravention of clause (1) shall be of no effect.

(3) If any question arises as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the exercise of any powers or
jurisdiction by a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court or a Martial Law Authority or any
other person deriving powers from a Martial Law Authority, it shall be referred to the Chief Martial Law
Administrator whose decision thereon shall be final.

Explanation.‑"Martial Law Authority" means the Chief Martial Law Administrator and includes a Deputy
Chief Martial Law Administrator, a Zonal Martial Law Adminis*trator, a Sub‑Administrator of Martial
Law or any person designated as such by any of them.

4. If any question arises as to the interpretation of any Martial Law Regulation or a Martial Law Order,
it shall be referred to the Martial Law Authority issuing the same for decision and the decision of such
Martial Law Authority shall be final and shall not be questioned in any Court, Tribunal or other
authority, including the Supreme Court and a High Court.

A. M. YAHYA KHAN, H. PK.. H. J.,
General,
President and Chief Martial Law
Administrator."

It will be noticed that the latter Order is described in the Gazette as an Order made by the President,
although its Preamble states that it is being made :‑

"In exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President and Chief Martial Law
Administrator is pleased to make and promulgate the following Order."

It is signed by General A. M. Yahya Khan, who is described both as President and Chief Martial Law
Administrator.

The former Order has been issued as an Order only of the Chief Martial Law Administrator and is
signed as such.

It has become necessary to point out these facts, because, the argument has been advanced that the
second Order is only a Presidential Order made in exercise of the powers given to the President either
under Article 3 or Article 8 of the Provisional Constitution Order and, therefore, an order of a
Sub‑constitu*tional nature which could not alter or amend the Constitution itself. This right having
been specifically reserved for the Chief Martial Law Administrator by the express language of Article ?
(1) of the Provisional Constitution Order. The Constitution could, therefore, it is argued be amended
only by a "Regulation or Order made by the Chief Martial Law Administrator" and by no other means
and by no one else, because, under the scheme of the Provisional Constitution Order itself the
President was a subordinate authority created by the Martial Law and his functions were limited to the
performance of "functions assigned to the President of Pakistan by or under the said Constitution or by
or under any law". Article 8 of this Order was, it is said, not repugnant to the provisions of clause (1)
of Article 3 and did not override the same, because, it could be given a harmonious interpretation by
limiting the power of making orders by the President thereunder to orders of a constitutional nature
necessary for the administration of the affairs of the State but only to the extent they did not conflict
with the Constitution or those parts of it which bad been preserved by the Provisional Constitution
Order or were not inconsistent with any Martial Law Regulation. The mere description given under the
signature in the above‑quoted Order No. 3 of 1969 or in the Preamble did not alter its true character
or give to it the status of a Martial Law Regulation which alone could amend or alter the Constitution.
It was and remained a Presidential Order and a sub‑constitutional legislation.

It is further pointed out that in this respect the Provisional Constitution Order of 1969 also makes a
radical departure from the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order of 1958. Under the latter the President
as well as the Chief Administrator of Martial Law could both amend the Constitution but under the
former only the Chief Martial Law Administrator could do so. The intention was, therefore, clear and
under the principle of expressio unius est excluslo alterius there was no scope for holding that the
Constitution could be amended by a Presidential Order.

The learned Attorney‑General has attempted to draw our attention to a number of Orders issued in
exercise of the powers given under section 8 of the Provisional Constitution Order to show that where
an Order was made in exercise of this power it was expressly so mentioned but the mere recital of this
fact in a particular Order does not necessarily mean that the non‑recital of the said fact would give an
order described and published in the Gazette as a Presidential Order a higher status. We have also
discovered that no set practice was followed during this period for even Ordinances were made in the
purported exercise of powers under the Proclamation and all other powers vested in that behalf in the
President and the Chief Martial Law Administrator and were signed by the person concerned under the
description of "President and Chief Martial Law Administrator". The official description of the legislative
measure is, therefore, the only safe indication available of its true nature. I am, therefore, unable to
agree with the learned Attorney‑General that this Presidential Order could have amended the
Constitution and taken away, as it has purported to do, the jurisdiction of the High Courts to even
receive or entertain any complaint, petition, application or other representation whatsoever against, or
in relation to the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by any Special Military Court or Summary
Military Court or any Martial Law Authority or any person exercising power or jurisdiction derived from
the Martial Law Authority under Article 98 of the Constitution of 1962, which had been preserved even
by the Provisional Constitution Order of 1969.

This provision, as very appropriately pointed out by Mr. Brohi, strikes at the very root of the judicial
power of the Court to hear and determine a matter, even though it may relate to its own jurisdiction.
The Courts undoubtedly have the power to hear and determine any matter or controversy which is
brought before them, even if it be to decide whether they have the jurisdiction to determine such a
matter or not. The superior Courts are, as is now well settled, the Judges of their own jurisdic*tion.
This is a right which has consistently been claimed by this and other Courts of superior jurisdiction in
all civilised countries and it is on the basis of this very right that this Court itself went into the
question of the validity of the Martial Law in Dosso's case. If Muhammad Munir, C. J. in 1958 could feel
that the Courts "on being properly moved still had the right to say whether what had happened was
legal or illegal" then what has happened since to take away that right. What was done in 1958 can still
be done even though the result might well be different.

Learned Attorney‑General does not seriously dispute the correctness of the contention that "judicial
power" is different from "jurisdiction" and so far as judicial power is concerned it must exist in Courts
as long as the Courts are there. In fact, he has been bold enough, and I admire him for his boldness,

in characterising these provisions of the Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969, which seek to take away the
judicial power itself as "absurdities". He frankly concedes that the Courts have and must have the
power to determine all questions of their own jurisdiction. It is a proposition so well‑settled that no
one can challenge it.

The learned Attorney‑General has, however, sought to contend that where there is a written
Constitution the Courts are themselves creatures of the Constitution and have only such jurisdictions
as the Constitution chooses to confer upon them. I have no cavil with this proposition, as I have
myself in several cases indicated, that the Constitution can confer or restrict the jurisdiction of even
superior Courts but this is not the same thing as saying that it can also restrict or curtail the judicial
power, because, that in effect would be denying to the Court the very function for which it exists, i.e.
to decide a controversy even if it relates to its own jurisdiction.

In the view that I have taken of the Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 that it is a sub‑constitutional
legislation I cannot but hold that it could not have curtailed the jurisdiction that was given to the High
Courts and to this Court by the Constitution of 1962, for, that jurisdiction was preserved even by the
Provisional Constitution Order,

Looking at the matter, therefore, from any point of view, whether, from the strictly legal and
constitutional side, or on the basis of the principle of implied authority as suggested by Mr. A Manzoor
Qadir, or even in terms of the so‑called legal order purported to be created by the Provisional
Constitution Order of 1969 itself, I cannot escape the conclusion that the Presidential Order No. 3 was
an unconstitutional document. General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan had according to me, no
authority to pass such legislation taking away the powers of the Courts in his capacity as President
under the Provisional Constitution Order. The Martial Law introduced by him was illegal and, therefore,
even as Chief Martial Law Administrator he was not competent to validly pass such laws, and it
certainly was in excess of the implied authority, if any, given to him by the letter of Field Marshal
Muhammad Ayub Khan dated the 24th of March 1969.

The High Courts were, therefore, wrong in thinking that they had no jurisdiction to enquire into this
matter.

I come now to the Martial Law Regulation No. 78 which was promulgated on the 17th of April 1971.
This too has to be quoted in extenso. It reads as follows:‑

"MARTIAL LAW REGULATION

BY

CHIEF MARTIAL LAW ADMINISTRATOR, PAKISTAN

Restriction of Movements of Suspected Persons, Restriction Orders and Detention Orders, Regulation.

REGULATION No. 78

1. The Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Martial Law Administrator or a Deputy Martial Law
Administrator authorised by the Martial Law Administrator concerned in this behalf. If satisfied with
respect to any particular person, that with a view to preventing him from acting in a seditious manner

or in a man*ner prejudicial to the security, the public safety or interest or the defence of Pakistan.
maintenance of public order, Pakistan's relations with any other power the maintenance of peaceful
conditions In any part of Pakistan the maintenance of essential supplies and services, it Is necessary
so to do, may make an order ;‑

(a) directing such person to remove himself from Pakistan in such manner, by such time and by such
route as may be specified In the order, and prohibiting his return to Pakistan ;

(A) directing that he be detained ;

(c) directing that he shall not remain within any specified area In Pakistan except on the conditions
and subject to the restrictions specified in the order or to be specified by an authority or a person
specified in the order ;

(d)"requiring him to reside or remain in such place or within such area in Pakistan as may be specified
In the order or to proceed to a place or area within such time as may be specified in the order ;

(e) requiring him to notify his movements or to report himself or both to notify his movements and
report himself in such manner at such times and to such authority or person as may be specified In
the order ;

(f) imposing upon him such restrictions as may be specified in the order in respect of employment or
business, in respect of his association or communication with other persons, and in respect of his
activities in relation to the dissemination of news or propagation of opinions ;

(g) prohibiting or restricting the possession or use by him of any such article or articles as may be
specified is the order ---

(h) otherwise regulating his conduct in regard to any matter as may be specified in the order;

Provided that no order shall be made under clause (a) of this paragraph against any citizen of Pakistan
and by any person other than the Chief Martial Law Administrator.

2. Any order made under paragraph I may require the person against whom it is made to enter into a
bond, with or without sureties, for the due observance of the restrictions and conditions specified in
the order.

3. If any person remains in any area or place or fails to leave any area or place fn contravention of an
order made under paragraph 1 he may be removed from the area or place by any police officer or
"other person acting on behalf of the Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Martial Law Administrator or
a Deputy Martial Law Administrator authorised by the Martial Law Administrator concerned in this
behalf.

4. A person who is ordered to be detained under this Regu*lation shall be detained in such place and
under such conditions as to maintenance, discipline and punishment for breaches of discipline, as the
Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Martial Law Administrator or a Deputy Martial Law Administrator

authorised by the Martial Law Administrator concerned in this behalf may from time to time
determine.

5. The Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Martial Law Administrator or a Deputy Martial Law
Administrator authorised by the Martial Law Administrator concerned in this behalf. if has reason to
believe that a person in respect of whom an order under clause (b) of paragraph 1 has been made,
has absconded or, is concealing himself so that the order cannot be executed, may‑

(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction in the place
where the said person was ordinarily residing and thereupon the provisions of sections 87, 88 and 89
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) shall apply in respect of the said person and
his property as if he were a person against whom a warrant had been issued by the Magistrate and
was absconding; and

(b) by notified order direct the said person to appear before such officer, at such place and within such
period as may be specified in the order; and if the said person fails to comply with such direction he
shall, unless he proves that it was not possible for him to comply with the direction. and that he had,
within the period specified in the order, informed the officer of the reason which had rendered
compliance impossible and also of his whereabouts, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

6. (a) If any person contravenes any order made under this Regulation, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprison*ment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.

(b) Where by reason of a contravention of an order made under this Regulation, a bond executed
under paragraph 2 has been forfeited, the Court having jurisdiction to try the person who had
contravened the order may call upon any person bound by the bond to pay the penalty thereof or to
show cause why it should not be paid, and if sufficient cause is not shown ‑and the penalty is not paid,
the Court may proceed to recover the same in the same manner, as a Court proceeding on the
for*feiture, of a bond under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1893).

A. M. YAHYA KHAN GENERAL,

Commander‑in‑Chief, Pakistan Army and

Chief Martial Law Administrator.

Rawalpindi, the 9th April 1971. "

This gives very wide powers to the Chief Martial Law Administrator and a Zonal Martial Law
Administrator and even a Deputy Martial Law Administrator to detain a person without r trial for any
length of time, without giving him any reasons for such detention or any opportunity even of making
any re-presenta*tion against such a detention. These are indeed very extraordinary powers for taking
away the most cherished right of a citizen in a most arbitrary manner. They provide no machinery for
seeking any redress against any possible abuse or misuse of power or for making any representation
or even for an appeal from Ceaser to Ceaser. Learned counsel for the appellants contend that since
the Provisional Constitution Order preserves Article 2 of the Constitution of 1962 and the Fundamental
Right No. 1 given thereunder has not been abrogated, this measure even if it can be regarded as a
`law' is void.

Article 2, as earlier indicated, assures a citizen that "no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body.
reputation or property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with law", and Fundamental
Right No. 1 guarantees that "no person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with
law."

What is `law' has already been dealt with earlier in this judgment‑so now I have to decide whether
Martial Law Regula*tion No. 78 is a valid law. since I have already held that neither President's Order
No. 3 of 1969 has succeeded in taking away that jurisdiction nor can the promulgation of Martial Law
by itself produce that effect.

It is interesting to note that the impugned Regulation itself does not contemplate the ouster of the
jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts of the land, for, the intrinsic evidence of its own terms is to the
contrary. Paragraph 6(b) thereof clearly contemplates that if any person contravenes any order made
under this Regulation he shall be tried by a "Court having jurisdiction to try the person". This can only
mean the ordinary criminal Courts, for, no other machinery is provided for punishment In the case of
such contravention. Again clause (a) of paragraph 5 speaks of a "Magistrate of the First Class" and
refers to certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Does this not mean that where a Court
has tried anyone for the contravention of any order made under the Regulation the ordinary incidents
of appeal and revision will also be attracted as a normal consequence of such a trial? The question of
exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Courts, therefore, does not arise in terms of this Regulation. If it
arises at all it arises under the Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 with which I have already dealt.

However, as this question has been raised, regarding the validity of Martial Law Regulation No. 78, I
must point out that it follows from what I have said earlier that it was made by an authority whose
legal competence we have not been able to recognise on the ground of want of legal authority and the
unconstitutional manner of arrogation of power.

The learned Attorney‑General, however, insists that even this regime had received the legal
recognition of this Court and, therefore, it had also acquired de jure authority to make laws. Reference
in this connection has been made to two decisions. The first was in the case of Muhammad Ismail v.
The State (P L D 1969 S C 241) in which the judgment was delivered again by myself. The only
question raised in this case was as to whether after the promulga*tion of Martial Law on the 25th of
March 1969, and the enact*ment of the Provisional Constitution Order on the 4th of April 1969, this
Court continued to retain the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Constitution of 1962 to entertain
petitions for special leave to appeal in criminal proceedings in view of the fact that the Provisional
Constitution Order did not specifically provide for any appeal by special leave. No question was raised
in this case as to the validity of the Martial Law or of the Provisional Constitution Order. The only
question argued was whether on a proper construction of the language of this order an appeal for
special leave in criminal proceedings was still within the competence of this Court. The Court held that
upon a proper construction of the terms of the Order the Jurisdiction to enter*tain and hear appeals
by special leave in criminal matters had not been taken away and that the jurisdiction given to it by
Article 58 of the 1962‑Constitution remained unaffected. There was no question, therefore, of any
conscious application of the mind of the Court to the question of the validity of the regime or the
legality of the Provisional Constitution Order nor was this Court called upon to give any decision
thereon as the latter order had manifested no intention to alter that jurisdiction and there was no
conflict between the two. It is not correct, therefore, to say that this decision in any way constitutes a
conscious recognition in law of the new regime.

The next case referred to is that of Mian Fazal Ahmad v. The State (1970 S C M R 650). In this case,
which was a petition for special leave from an order of the Lahore High Court dismissing an application
under section 561‑A of the Code of Criminal Proce*dure for quashment of certain criminal proceedings
pending investigation by the police, the High Court had admitted the petition and directed the police
not to put up any challan in any Court. The police did not do so but instead of submitting a challan
before a criminal Court placed the matter before a Military Court and the. latter convicted the
petitioner. Thereupon the petitioner moved the High Court, for taking action against the D S. P. in
contempt for disobedience of its order. The High Court dismissed the application of the petitioner. and
this Court by a very brief order dismissed the petition for special leave observing that "when the
Military Court took cognizance of the offence and imposed a penalty on the petitioner the learned

Judge in the High Court was right in dismissing the petitioner's application under section 561‑A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure." No other reason was given for the order.

Again, this does not show that the legality of the order of transfer of the case to the Military Court was
ever challenged. The High Court's order was upheld possibly on the ground that the proceedings which
were sought to be quashed by the original petition having been terminated by the transfer of the case
to the Military Court, there was no further need of its quashment, and no question of commitment of
the D. S. P. in contempt arose, as he had not violated the order of the High Court. In these
circum*stances, it can hardly be urged that this constitutes a conscious legal recognition of the
military regime of 1969. Questions in dispute in these cases were entirely different and had nothing
whatever to do with the question now before us. It s incorrect, therefore, to say that this Court had
given any legal recognition to the regime of General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan.

The question, therefore, is still at large and has for the first time now been raised before this Court in
this specific form. The learned Attorney‑General's contention that even the tacit appro*val given by
this Court by not questioning suo motu the various Martial Law Regulations made by the regime
concerned during this period of 2J years is itself sufficient to preclude this Court from going into this
question now, is not, in my opinion, tenable. The Courts, as I have already indicated, are not called
upon to suo motu raise a controversy and then decide it. They can only do so if a litigant raises the
controversy in a concrete form, as it has now been done before us. `‑The Court", says Mr. Eaton
Drome, has authority to expound the Constitution only in cases presented to it for adjudication. Its
Judges may see the President usurping powers that do not belong to him, Congress exercising
functions it is forbidden to exercise, a State asserting rights denied to it. The Court has no authority to
interfere until its office is invoked in a case submitted to it in the manner prescribed by law." (Vide
Marriot's English Politi*cal Institutions, 1938 Edn., p. 293).

Incidentally it may also be mentioned here that a great deal. that has been said about the oath of
Judges is also not germane to the question now before us, for, in the view I take of the duty of a
Judge to decide a controversy that is brought before him it cannot be said that any Judge of this Court
has violated his oath which he took under the Constitution of 1962. He was not called upon to take
any other oath thereafter and is still no doubt bound by that oath and will stand by it. But it must not
be overlooked that since his own powers are limited to deciding a controversy properly brought before
him by a litigant or on his behalf, an equal duty lay on the gentlemen of the Bar as well to raise this
question. This was never done and it may be pertinent to point out that even the learned gentlemen
of the Bar, except the learned Attorney‑General, who have now argued this case, actively, at some
stage or the other, co‑operated with the various Martial Law regimes either as High Commissioner,
Minister, Attorney‑General, or Advocate‑General. So far as this Court is concerned it has always acted
in accordance with its oath and will continue to do so whenever a controversy is brought before it, no
matter what the consequences.

Reverting now to the question of the legality of the Presi*dential Order No. 3 of 1969 and the Martial
Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971 it follows from the reasons given earlier that they were both made by
an incompetent authority and, therefore, lacked the attribute of legitimacy which is one of the
essential: characteristics of a valid law. The Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969 was also invalid on two
additional grounds, namely, that it was a Presidential Order, which could not in terms of the Pro
visional Constitution Order itself amend the Constitution so as to take away the jurisdiction conferred
upon the High Court under Article 98 and that it certainly could not, in any event, take away the
judicial power of the Courts to hear and determine questions pertaining even to their own jurisdiction
and this power could not be vested in another authority as long as the Courts continued to exist.

This does not, however, dispose of the case, for we are again presented by the learned
Attorney‑General with the argument that a greater chaos might result by the acceptance of this
principle of legitimacy. He has reminded the Court of the grave consequences that followed when in
Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan's case a similar argument was spurned by the Federal Court and "disaster"
brought in. I am not unmindful of the grave responsibility that rests upon Courts not to do anything
which might make confusion worse confounded or create a greater state of chaos if that can possibly
be avoided consistently with their duty to decide in accordance with law.

Some of the learned counsel appearing on the other side at first advocated that we should totally
ignore this argument but Mr. Manzoor Qadir and Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada frankly conceded that within
certain limits validation can be given to certain acts of even a de facto usurper of power either on the
ground of state necessity or implied authority. Mr. Anwar sought at one stage to disassociate himself
with this view but when it was pointed out to him that the result would then be that even the Legal
Framework Order (No. 2 of 1970) and the elections held there*under would also become invalid, he
too hesitated and thought that that might be going too far. Mr. Brohi on the other hand, is prepared to
concede only this much that an usurper may be given the limited power of acting within the
framework of the Constitution, but nothing beyond that.

This is a difficult question to decide and although I have for my guidance the example of our own
Federal Court, which in Governor‑General's Reference No. 1 of 1955 invoked the maxim of salus populi
suprema lax to create some kind of an order out of chaos, I would like to proceed with great caution,
for, I find it difficult to legitimize what I am convinced is illegiti*mate. I shall, therefore, first examine
some other decisions which have been cited at the Bar before I begin to formulate my own views in
the matter.

I have been referred to the decision of the Privy Council in the case of Madzimbamuto v.
Lardner‑Burke and another ((1968) 3 A E R 561) where Lord Pearce in a very elaborate dissenting
judgment accept*ed that acts done by those actually in control without lawfull authority may be
recognized as valid or acted upon by the Courts within certain limitations, on principles either of
necessity or implied mandate, particularly where the enquiry is being made ex post facto, because,
common sense dictates that every thing done during the intervening period, whether good or bad,
cannot be treated in the same manner. In support of this proposition the noble lord refers also to a
passage from Grotius' book on De Jure Belli et Pacis (Book 1, Ch. 4) where the following princi*ple is
enunciated :‑‑

"Now while such a usurper is in possession, the acts of Government which he performs may have a
binding force, arising not from a right possessed by him, for no such right exists, but from the fact
that one to whom the sovereignty actually belongs, whether people, king, or senate, would prefer that
measures promulgated by him should meanwhile have the force of law, in order to avoid the utter
confusion which would result from the subversion of laws and suppression of the Courts."

There is no doubt that a usurper may do things both good, and bad; and he may have during the
period of usurpation also made many Regulations or taken actions which would be valid if emanating
from a lawful Government and which may well have, In the course of time, affected the enforcement
of contracts, the celebration of marriages, the settlement of estates, the transfer of property and
similar subjects. Are all these to be invalidated and the country landed once again into confusion?

Such a principle, it appears, has also been adopted in America In various cases which came up after
the suppression of the rebellion of the Southern States and the American Courts roc adopted the
policy that where the acts done by the usurper were "necessary to peace and good order among
citizens and bat affected property or contractual rights they should not be invalidated", not because
they were legal but because they would cause inconvenience to innocent persons and lead to further
difficulties. Vide Texas v. White ((1868) 7 Wallace 733), Horn v, Loekhurt ((1373) 17 Wallace 850) and
Baldy v. Hunter ((1897) 171 U S 388).

Lord Pearce himself indicated 3 limitations for the validation! of such acts, namely :‑‑

"(1) So far as they are directed to and reasonably required: for ordinary orderly running of the State ;

(2) so far as they do not impair the rights of citizens under the lawful Constitution ; and

(3) so far as they are not intended to and do not in fact directly help the usurpation and do not run
contrary to the policy of the lawful Sovereign."

The judgments of the Court of Appeal in Rhodesia in the same case and of a: Court in Uganda in the
case of Uganda v. Commissioner of Prisons, Ex Parte Matovu (1966 E A L R ‑ 514) have also been
cited before us but I do not propose to deal with them, as they seem mainly to draw their inspiration
from Hans Kelsen and the decision in Dosso's case. There is, however, another case from Nigeria
where the military take over was not accepted as legitimate but condoned as a "manifestation of
necessity" and not as "revolutionary breach of legal continuity''. On this basis even the fundamental
rights guaranteed by the pre‑existing constitution were also maintained in the case of Lakamani and
0la v. Attorney General (West), Nigeria. (Unfortunately the full report of this decision is not available
but it is referred to in S. A. de Smith's book on Constitutional and Administrative Law).

We have also in this connection been referred to a case from Cyprus sub‑nomine. The
Attorney‑General of the Republic v. Mustafa Ibrahim and others (1964 C L R 196) where the Supreme
Constitutional Court of Cyprus also applied the doctrine of necessity to validate a certain legislation
which was otherwise to consistent with certain Articles of the Cyprus Constitution on the ground that
they would be justified "if it can be shown that it was enacted only in order to avoid consequences
which could not otherwise be avoided, and which if they had followed, would have inflicted upon the
people of Cyprus, whoa the Executive and Legislative organs of the Republic are bound to protect,
inevitable irreparable evil end furthermore if it can be shown that no more was done than was
reasonably necessary for that purpose, and that the evil inflicted by the enactment in question, was
not disproportionate to the evil avoided" This the Court thought was its duty to do in view of its "all
important and responsible function of transmit*ting legal theory into living law; applied to the acts bf
daily life fur the preservation of social order"

I too am of the opinion that recourse has to be taken to the doctrine of necessity where the ignoring
of it would result in disastrous consequences to the body politic and upset the social order itself but I
respectfully beg to disagree with the view that this is a doctrine for validating the illegal acts of
usurpers In my humble opinion, this doctrine can be invoke in aid only after the Court has come to the
conclusion that the acts of the usurpers were illegal and illegitimate. It is only then that the question
arises as to how many of his acts, legislative or other*wise, should be condoned or maintained,
notwithstanding their illegality in the wider public interest. I would call this a principle of condonation
and not legitimization.

Applying this test I would condone (1) all transactions which are past and closed, for, no useful
purpose can be served by re*opening the n, (2) all acts and legislative measures which are in
accordance with, or could have been made under, the abrogated Constitution or the previous legal
order, (3) all acts which tend to advance or promote the good of the people, (4) all acts required to be
done for the ordinary orderly running of the State and all such measures as would establish or lead to
the establishment of. in our case, the objectives mentioned In the Objectives Resolution of 1954. I
would not, however, condone any act intended to Entrench the usurper more firmly in his power or to
directly help him to run the country contrary to its legitimate objectives. I would not also condone
anything which seriously impairs the rights of the citizens except in so far as they may be designed to
advance the social welfare and national solidarity.

Applying these tests to the President's Order No. 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971
lam not in a position to say that they fall in either of the categories mentioned above, although the
learned Attorney‑General has very strenuously contended that when Martial Law Regulation No. 78
was enacted a state of rebellion was prevailing in East Pakistan. Even if that was so, the Regulation
could well have been restricted to the territories in which such a state of grave disorder prevailed.
There is no evidence before us that there wag arty danger of such large scale disorder in West
Pakistan. Furthermore, even if reasonable powers of preventive detention were necessary in West
Pakistan to meet the case of any individual the security of Pakistan Act was available and at the time
the impugned order of detention was actually made even the Defence of Pakistan Rules were
available. Both of these contain ample provisions for detaining a person without trial. I am not in a
position, there. fore, to say that Martial Law Regulation No. 78 was necessary for the ordinary orderly
running of the State or for promoting the good of the people of West Pakistan. This Regulation cannot
thus in my opinion, be justified even on the ground of necessity.

It is interesting to note that one of the detenus before us; namely, Malik Ghulam Jilani, was originally
arrested under rule 32 read with rule 213 of the Defence of Pakistan Rules "with a view to preventing
him from acting in a manner prejudicial to security, public safety and interest and defence of
Pakistan." It was only subsequently that the order of detention was substituted by an order under
Martial Law Regulation No. 78, but this too added no new grounds and all that it stated was that
"whereas dl is necessary to prevent Malik Ghularn Jilani son of late Khan Bahadur Nazar Muhammad
Khan, resident of 131/L‑1, Gulberg III, Lahore, from acting in a manner prejudicial to security, public
safety and interest, and defence of Pakistan". It is obvious therefore, from these orders themselves
that what could be done under Martial Law Regulation No. 78 could also be done under the Defence of
Pakistan Rules. The only object of converting the order into an order under Martial Law Regulation No.
78 was to deprive the Courts of their jurisdiction to entertain any application against such detention
under the terms of President's Order No. 3 of 1969.

The latter Order too was clearly unnecessary, for, there is nothing to indicate that the Courts were, in
any way, subverting the authority of Government or doing anything which could, by any stretch of
imagination, be considered to be objectionable.

In these circumstances, I have, for the reasons given above, come to the conclusion that both these
orders were not only Illegitimate but were also incapable of being maintained on the ground of
necessity. The result which follows from this conclusion is that both the detentions were, in my view,
illegal and the High Court should have declared the impugned orders of detention to be void and of no
legal effect.

It remains now for me only to consider another argument advanced by the le rued Attorney‑General
that the attack is directed really against the present regime and not against the regime of General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan. The learned counsel, on the other side, have all protested that this is
not so but in order to leave no room for doubt I wish to make it clear that this decision is confined to
the question in issue before this Court, namely, the validity of the Presidential Order No. 3 of 1969
and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971 and has nothing whatsoever to do with the validity of the
present regime. I am fully conscious of the fact that there were very important differen*ces which
may well have a bearing on this question. The circum*stances may well have been totally dissimilar.
Again since the preparation of this judgment further developments have taken place of which I am
entitled to take notice. The National Assembly has met and ratified the assumption of power by the
new President who is an elected representative of the people and the leader of the majority party in
the National Assembly as now constituted. The Assembly has also, it is said, ratified an interim
Constitution. Its terms are not known to the Court as yet but these developments may well hive
radically altered the situation. However, since this question is not before this Court I refrain from
expressing any definite opinion with regard thereto.

Before I conclude this judgment I feel it my duty also to place on record my appreciation of the very
able assistance given to this Court by all the learned counsel concerned. In particular I wish to
express my gratitude to both Mr. A. K. Brohi and Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada for the enormous amount of
research under*taken by them and the willing assistance rendered by them as amicus curiae in spite
of their heavy engagements elsewhere.

In the result, therefore, I would allow both these appeals and declare both the impugned orders of
detention to be void and without legal effect: The detenus should now be set at liberty forthwith
unless they are being detained under any other order passed under any valid law.

MUHAMMAD YAQUB ALI, J.‑These two appeals one filed by Miss Asma Jilani and the other by Mrs.
Zarina Gauhar arise oat of habeas corpus 'petitions tiled by the first named in the; Punjab High Court

for the release of her father Malik Ghulam Jilani and by the second named in the Sind *Baluchistan
High Court for the release of her husband Mr. Altaf Gauhar.

Malik Ghulam Jilani was taken into custody on the 20th December 1971, by the order of the Governor
of the Punjab under rule 32, sub‑rule (1), clause (b) read with rule 213 of the Defence of Pakistan
Rules, 1971, on the ground that it was necessary to prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial
to security, public safety, interest and Defence of Pakistan. On the 23rd December 1971, Miss Asma
Jilani, filed a habeas corpus petition under Article 98(2)(b)(i) of the Constitution of 1962 questioning
the detention of her father on more than one ground. A learned Judge issued rule to the respondent
for :the 31st December 1971 to show cause as to why the order of detention be not set aside. On the
30th December 1971, the Governor rescinded the order of detention and simultaneously, ,in his
capacity as Martial Law Administrator, Zone 'C', passed .an order under Martial Law Regulation 78,
directing that Malik Ghulam Mint be detained in his house situated in Gulberg III, Lahore, till further
orders under such Police custody as the District Magistrate, Lahore, may deem necessary. He was
‑further restrained from making any speech, statement or utter*ance which may be seditious or
prejudicial to the security, the public safety or interest, the defence of Pakistan, the maintenance of
public order, Pakistan's relations with any other power, the maintenance of peaceful conditions in any
part of Pakistan or the maintenance of essential supplies and services ; he shall not meet any person
without the prior approval of the District Magistrate, Lahore, except the present inmates of the said
house :and shall be responsible to bear his own expenses including that of medical aid.

On the 31st December 1971, Miss Asma Jilani obtained permission to file supplementary grounds in
support of the habeas corpus petition and attacked the legality and propriety of the fresh order of
detention. The case came up for hearing on 15th January 1972, before Shafiur Rahman, J.‑whereupon
the Advocate‑General appearing for the respondent raised a prelimi*nary objection that the High
Court could not assume jurisdic*tion because of the bar captained in the Jurisdiction of Courts
Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969.

In reply the counsel for the petitioner contended that Martial Law Regulation 78 under which Malik
Ghulam Jilani was being detained was not a part of the law of the land having been pro*mulgated by a
person who had usurped power by "waging war against Pakistan" and that he took power from Ayub
Khan in violation of the provisions of the Constitution of 1962, to *protect and defend which
Constitution both Ayub Khan and Yahya Khan had taken oaths. It was further maintained that the
provisions of Martial Law Regulation 78 and the Jurisdic*tion of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of
1969, were con*trolled by Article 2 of the 1962‑Constitution which envisaged due process of law.

The petition was dismissed by the learned Judge on account* of the bar contained in the Jurisdiction
of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969 excluding the jurisdiction of Courts. including the High
Courts and the Supreme Court to call in question any order passed by a Martial Law authority.

Mr. Altaf Gauhar was taken into custody on the night bet*ween 4th and 5th February 1972, from his
residence in Karachi., under the order passed by the Martial Law Administrator,, Zone `D', under
Martial Law Regulation 78. It was provided in the order that Mr. Altaf Gauhar was to be detained for a
period of six months and committed to the custody of the Superintendent, Central Prison, Karachi.
This part of the order,, of detention was, however, not implemented, and he was detain*ed, in a
private bungalow in Karachi, but no one knew his where*abouts. Later on, he was taken to a rest
house in the Sihala Police Training School and lodged there.

On the following morning Mrs. Zarina Gauhar filed a habeas corpus petition in the High Court of Sind &
Baluchistan under Article 98(2)(b)(i) of 1962‑Constitution calling in question the detention of her
husband as without lawful authority.

It was pleaded that the arrest of Mr. Altaf Gauhar in an unknown place was without lawful authority as
no warrant of arrest was served upon him or shown to him. nor the authority under which he may
have been detained in custody was dis*closed. It was further urged : (i) that even if it was hereafter
urged that Mr. Altaf Gauhar was detained under Martial Law Regulation 78 the detention was illegal

and without lawful autho*rity inasmuch as the Martial Law Regulation 78 itself does not constitute the
law of the land ; (ii) that Martial Law, even if It be the will of an individual, Martial Law Ruler, who
seizes power, is not a heritable commodity and vanishes with the original proclaimer, ceasing to
exercise power for any reason and that there was no separate and independent Proclamation of
Martial Law or Emergency by the present Chief Martial Law Administrator ; and (iii) that the exercise,
by a civilian, of Martial Law powers is fundamentally opposed to the concept of Martial Law which
signifies Military rule.

On the 7th February 1972, the petition was admitted the *hearing by a Division Bench and a rule
issued to the respon*dent for a date to be fixed in office. On the 11th of February: 1972, Mrs. Zarina
Gauhar filed an application under section 497, Cr. P. C., read with Article 98(2)(b)(i) of
1962‑Constitution for granting interim bail to Mr. Altaf Gauhar during the pen*dency of the hearing of
the habeas corpus petition.

The petition for bail was heard on the 18th February 1972,. and dismissed by Dorab F. Patel and
Imdad Ally H. Agha, JJ.,‑

with the observation that the counsel for the petitioner had failed to pursuade them that the Court had
jurisdiction to grant rule against Martial Law order. For the same reasons the habeas corpus too was
dismissed.

In declining to interfere with the orders passed by Martial Law authorities, the High Courts of the
Punjab and the Sind‑Balu*chistan relied on the judgment of this Court in the State v. Dosso and
others (P L D 1958 S C (Pak.) 533). The following observations of Muhammad Munir, C. J.‑were relied
upon as conclusive and the validity of the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969
and Martial Law Regulation 78 of 1971;

"Thus a victorious revolution or a successful coup d'etat is an internationally recognised legal method
of changing a Constitution.

After a change of the Character, I have mentioned has taken place, the national legal order must for
its validity depend upon the new law‑creating organ. Even Courts lose their existing jurisdictions, and
can function only to the extent and in the manner determined by the new Constitution."

In support of the petition for leave to appeal, it was inter alia contended that the dictum in Dosso's
case require considera*tion and that even if the view expressed in it was accepted as correct no
victorious revolution or successful coup d'etat had taken place on the 25th March 1969, when Field
Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan stepped aside from the office of the President and invited General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan as Commander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army to perform his
constitutional and legal duty and defend the country from internal disorder and chaos which was
beyond the capacity of the Civil Government. It was questioned how could the Comman*der‑in‑Chief
in those circumstances be said to have staged a victorious revolution, or a successful coup d'etat.
Appeal was made by the learned counsel also to the oath taken both by Field Marshal Muhammad
Ayub Khan and General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan to preserve, protect and defend the
1962‑Constitution which inter alia provided that "If the President was unable to perform the functions
of his office, the Speaker of the National Assembly shall act as President and shall perform the
functions of the President". The assumption of the office of the President ; abrogation of the
1962‑Constitution ; and the dissolution of the National and Provincial Assemblies by General Agha
Muhammad Yahya Khan by the Proclamation issued by him on the 26th March 1969, were, on this
premises, claimed to be unlawful acts which Courts of Justice will not recognize. All the Martial Law
Regulations and Orders pro*mulgated by him as President and as Chief Martial Law Admi*nistrator
which were not relatable to immediate restoration of law and order were on the same ground claimed
to be uncon*stitutional, invalid and of no legal effect.

Leave to appeal was granted as questions of fundamental importance involving interpretation of the
1962‑Constitution and correctness of the decision in the State v. Dosso were involved.

Before proceeding further we may notice briefly the consti*tutional developments which took place in
Pakistan after it came into being on the 14th August 1947, consisting of two wings, namely, the
Province of East Bengal in the East, and the Provinces of the Punjab, N.‑W. F. P., Sind and Baluchistan
in the West. The constitutional structure of the State was based on the Indian Independence Act, 1947
(10 and 11 Geo. 6, Ch. 30) and the Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, Ch. 2) as adopted by
the Provisional Constitution Order, 1947. A constituent Assembly composed of Members from both
Wings who had been elected earlier was to act both as the Constitution‑making body and as Federal
Legislature of Pakistan. These constitutional Instru*ments provided for a Federal Government and
distribution of powers between the Executive. Legislative and Judicial organs of the State which is an
essential element of a democratic State.

Pakistan was faced with innumerable difficulties from the very start. Firstly, there was an influx of
nearly ten million people from the Indian dominion who had as a result of violent dis*turbances which
accompanied Partition of the sub‑continent were uprooted from their hearths and homes and entered
Pakistan as destitute refugees. The rehabilitation and settlement of these refugees pre‑empted most
of the time of the Government for a number of years. Secondly, Quaid‑i‑Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah,
Founder of Pakistan, in whom people had implicit faith and who served as a symbol of the unity of the
Nation died in September 1948. He was succeeded by Khawaja Nazimuddin, who was then the Chief
Minister of the Province of East Bengal. On the 11th September 1951, Khan Liaqat Ali Khan, the first
Prime Minister, on whom the political mental of Quaid‑i‑Azam had fallen and who commanded
obedience of the people throughout the country was assassinated. A tussle for grabbing power among
persons who held positions of advantage in the Govern*ment thereupon ensued and under its weight
the foundation of the State started quivering. Eventually Mr. Ghulam Muhammad, an ex‑Civil Servant,
who was holding the portfolio of Finance became the Governor‑General and Khawaja Nazimuddin as
Leader of the majority party in the Constituent Assembly assumed the Office of the Prime Minister.

In April 1953, Mr. Ghulam Muhammad dismissed Khawaja Nazimuddin and his Cabinet although he
commanded clear majority in the Constituent Assembly and made another civil servant Mr.
Muhammad Ali Bogra, Pakistan's Ambassador to the United States of America, as the Prime Minister.
Among others General Muhammad Ayub Khan, Commander‑in‑Chief of Pakistan Army, joined his
Cabinet as Defence Minister. This was the first constitutional mishap of Pakistan as Governor-*General
Mr. Ghulam Muhammad was only a constitutional head. He had to act on the advice given to him by
the Prime Minister and under the Constitutional Instruments (Indian Inde*pendence Act, 1947, and
the Government of India Act, 1935) he had no legal authority to dismiss the Prime Minister and
assume to himself the role of a sovereign.

On the 7th March 1949, the Constituent Assembly passed the Objectives Resolution which embodies
the "will" of the historically first Legislature of the country. The Resolution declar*ed as under ;

"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful;

Whereas sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to God Almighty alone and the authority which
he has delegated to the State of Pakistan 'through its people for being exercised within the limits
prescribed by him is a sacred trust;

This Constituent Assembly representing the people of Pakistan resolves to frame a constitution for the
sovereign independent State of Pakistan;

Wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality, tole*rance and social justice as enunciated by
Islam shall be fully observed ;

Wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in the individual and collective spheres in
accord with the teachings and requirements of Islam as set out in the Holy Quran and the Sunnah;

Wherein adequate provision shall be made for the minorities freely to profess and practise their
religions and develop their cultures;

Whereby the territories now included in or in accession with Pakistan and such other territories as may
hereafter be included in or accede to Pakistan shall form a Federation wherein the units will be
autonomous with such boundaries and limitations on their powers and authority as may be prescribed;

Wherein adequate provision shall be made to safeguard the legitimate interests of minorities and
backward and depressed classes;

Wherein the independence of the judiciary shall be fully secured;

Wherein the integrity of the territories of the Federation, its independence and all its rights including
its sovereign rights on land, sea and air shall be safeguarded;

So that the people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their rightful and honoured place amongst the
nations of the World and make their full contribution towards international peace and progress and
happiness of humanity."

Counsel for the appellants and the amicus curiae named the Reso*lution as Grund‑norm of Pakistan.
The Attorney‑General appearing for Martial Law Administrator, Zone `D', described, it as an
Instrument which embodied the ideology of Pakistan and which was the only bond of its unity.

By 1954, the draft of the Constitution based on the Objectives Resolution had been prepared with the
assent of the leaders of the various parties in the Constituent Assembly when on the 24th October
1954, Mr. Ghulam Muhammad knowing full well that the draft Constitution was ready, by a
Proclamation, dissolved the Constituent Assembly, and placed armed guards outside the Assembly
Hall. This was the second great mishap of Pakistan.

The order of the Governor‑General was challenged by Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan, President of the
Constituent Assembly, in the Chief Court of Sind by a Writ Petition filed under section 223‑A of the
Government of India Act, 1935, which was added by the Government of India (Amendment) Act,
1954, passed by the Constituent Assembly, on 16th July 1954. It empowered the High Courts to issue
Writs of mandamus, certiorari, quo warranto and habeas corpus. The order passed by Mr. Ghulam
Muhammad was challenged as unauthorised by the Indian Independence Act or the Government of
India Act, void and of no legal effect.

In defence of the Writ Petition, the Governor‑General and the Members of the newly‑constituted
Cabinet, cited as respondents, Inter alia pleaded that the Chief Court of Sind had no jurisdiction to
issue a Writ under the Government of India (Amendment) Act, 195‑1, as it had not received the
assent of the Governor-*General.

A Full Bench of the Chief Court overruled the objection raised by the respondents and held that the

order dissolving the Constituent Assembly was illegal and issued a Writ restraining the
Governor‑General; his newly appointed Cabinet Ministers; their agents and servants from
implementing or otherwise giving effect to the Proclamation of 24th October 1954, and from
inter*fering directly or indirectly with the functions of the Constituent Assembly.

The Governor‑General and his Ministers thereupon filed an appeal in the Federal Court being
Constitutional Appeal 1 of 1955 reiterating the objection that the Government of India (Amendment)
Act, 1954, did not become a law as it had not received the assent of the Governor‑General.

By a majority judgment delivered by Muhammad Munir, C. J. *the appeal was allowed and the writ
petition was dismissed on the finding that the Constituent Assembly when it functioned under
subsection (1) of section 8 of the Indian Independence Act acted as Legislature of the Dominion within
the meaning of section 6 of the Act and that under subsection (3) of the later section, the assent of
the Governor‑General was necessary to all legis*lation and that since section 223‑A of the
Government of India Act under which the Chief Court of Sind issued the Writ had not received such
assent, it was not yet law and, therefore, that Court had no jurisdiction to issue the Writs. Cornelius,
J. (as he then was) differed with this view and recorded a dissenting judgment holding that neither
the British sovereign nor the Governor‑General as such was a part of the Constituent Assem*bly. The
assent of the Governor‑General was, therefore, not necessary to give validity to the laws passed by
the Constituent Assembly. With great respect to the learned Chief Justice the interpretation placed by
him on sections 6 and 8 of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, as a result of which the appeal was
allowed, is ex facie erroneous though we do not propose to examine in detail the reason given in the
judgment.

Apart from the political cataclysm which the Proclamation of the 24th October, by Mr. Ghulam
Muhammad brought into being a large number of laws passed by the Constituent Assembly which had
from the very beginning not been placed before the Governor‑General for assent were declared by the
Court in the case of Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan as invalid. To meet this disaster the Governor‑General
purporting to act under section 42 of the Government of India Act promulgated an Ordinance called
the Emergency Powers Ordinance IX of 1955 by which he sought to validate and to give retrospective
effect to thirty‑five con*stituent Acts which had been passed by the Constituent Assembly under
subsection (1) of section 8 of the Indian Independence Act, 1947 (10 and 11 Geo. 6, Ch. 30). He also
added a proviso to section 176 of the Government of India Act, 1935, forbidding "the bringing of suits
or other proceedings against the Govern*ment or any Minister or Officer of the Government in respect
of or arising out of anything done or omitted to be done by the Governor‑General or by the
Government or by any person under or in consequence of the Governor‑General's Proclamation under
section 102 of the Government of India Act, 1935, which had been issued simultaneously with the
Ordinance". On the 15th April 1955. the Governor‑General summoned a Constituent Convention for
the 10th May 1955, for the purpose of making provision as to the Constitution of Pakistan, and on the
following day issued a Proclamation assuming to himself until other provision was made by the
Constituent Convention such powers as were necessary to validate and enforce the laws that were
needed to avoid a breakdown in the constitutional and adminis*trative machinery of the country or to
preserve the State and maintain the Government of the country in its existing condition, and in
exercise of those powers retrospectively validated and declared enforceable the laws mentioned in the
Schedule to the Emergency Powers Ordinance, 1955.

The question of the validity of section 2 of the Emergency Powers Ordinance, 1955, came up before
the Court in the case of one Asif Panel (P L D 1955 F C 387) within a few days of the decision in
Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan's case. On the short ground that under section 42 of the Government of India
Act, 1935, the Governor-*General had no power to make by Ordinance any provision as to .the
Constitution of the country. The Emergency Powers Ordinance IX of 1955 was held to be invalid
whereupon the Governor‑General made a Special Reference to the Federal Court which was answered
on the 16th May 1955. Dealing with the validity of this action the Court expressed the opinion that the
Constituent Assembly and not the Constituent Convention as was proposed to be set up by the
Governor‑General would be competent to exercise all powers conferred by the Indian Inde*pendence
Act, 1947, and secondly that in the situation presented In the Reference, the Governor‑General had
during the interim period the power under the common law, special or state necessity of
retrospectively validating the laws listed in the Schedule to the Ordinance, 1955, and all those laws
now decided upon by the Constituent Assembly or during the aforesaid period shall be valid and
enforced in the same way on which day they purported to have come into force.

Cornelius, J.‑as he then was differed with the opinion of the Court that the Governor‑General could on
the basis of the State necessity validate the laws which were declared invalid by the Federal Court and
opined that there was no provision in the Constitution and no rule of law applicable to the situation, by
which the .Governor‑General can, in the light of the Court's decision in the case of Usif Patel by
Proclamation or otherwise, validate laws enumerated in the Schedule to the Emergency Powers
Ordinance, 1955, whether temporarily or permanently.

In accordance with the opinion given by the Federal Court, a new Constituent Assembly was elected
and it eventually succeeded in framing a Constitution which came into force on the 23rd March 1956.
The Constitution provided for a federal Government with equal representation of peoples of both the
Wings in the National Assembly (Article 44). Fundamental rights and an independent judiciary to
enforce those rights were guaranteed. Article 5 provided that all citizens are equal before law and are
entitled to equal protection of law and that no person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in
accordance with law. Provision was made for preventive detention for a period not exceeding three
months unless the Board consisting of persons, appointed by the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the case
of a person detained under a Central Act and a Board consisting of persona nominated by the Chief
Justice of the High Court of the Province in the case of a person detained under a Provincial Act
reported that there was a sufficient cause for such detention.

The Federal Government was to be headed by a President who under Article 35 (1) could be
impeached on a charge of violating the Constitution or gross misconduct. He was to act as a
constitutional head and under Article 37 was to act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or the
appropriate Minister or Minister of State. To confer autonomy on the; Provinces, Article 107 provided
that Provincial Legislature shall have an exclusive power to make laws with respect to any matter not
enumerated in Federal, Provincial and Concurrent Lists.

A National Assembly was yet to be elected under the 1956* Constitution when Mr. Iskander Mirza who
had become the first President by a Proclamation issued on the 7th October 1958, abrogated the
Constitution; dissolved the National and. Provincial Assemblies and imposed Martial Law throughout
the country : General Muhammad Ayub Khan, Commander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army, mss
appointed as the Chief Administrator of Martial Law. This was the third great mishap which hit
Pakistan like a bolt from the blue.

On the 10th October 1958, Mr. Iskander Mirza issued the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order (1 of
1958) which inter alia provided;

"(1) Notwithstanding the abrogation of the Constitution of the 23rd March 1956, and subject to any
order of the President or Regulation made by the Chief Administrator of Martial Law, the Republic, to
be known henceforward as Pakistan, shall be governed as nearly as may be in accordance with the
late Constitution."

On the 13th October 1958, Criminal Appeals State v. Dosso and three other connected matters came
up for hearing before the Court. The respondents in these cases were convicted by Council‑of‑Elders
under the Frontier Crimes, Regulation 3 of 1901. The High Court of West Pakistan (Quetta Seat) 'set
aside their convictions on the finding that Frontier Crimes Regulation being repugnant to Article 5 of
the Constitution, the convictions were bad in law. The question raised by the Court was whether under
Article 7 of the Laws (Continuance in Force),Order, 1958, the writs issued by the High Court under
Article 170 of the Constitution setting aside the convictions of the respondents had abated.

Delivering the majority judgment of the Court Munir, C. J. held that as Article 5 of the late Constitution
itself had now disappeared from the new Legal Order, the Frontier Crimes Regulation (III of 1901) was
by reason of Article IV of the Laws (Continuance in Fore) Order, 1958, still in force and all
proceed*ings in cases in which the validity of that Regulation had been called in question having
abated the convictions of the respondents recorded by the Council‑of‑Elders was good. The conclusion
reached by the learned Chief Justice proceeded on the following reasons;

"As we will have to interpret some of the provisions of this Order, it is necessary to appraise the
existing constitutional position in the light of the juristic principles which determine the validity or
otherwise of law‑creating organs in modern States which being members of the comity of nations are
governed by International Law. In judging the validity of laws at a given time, one of the basic
doctrines of legal positivism, on which the whole science of modern jurisprudence rests, requires a
jurist to presuppose the validity of historically the first Constitution whether it was given by an internal
usurper, an external invader or a national hero or by a popular or other assembly of persons.
Subsequent alterations in the Constitution and the validity of all laws made thereunder is determined
by the first Constitution. Where a Constitution presents such continuity, a law once made continues in
force, until it is repealed, altered or amended in accordance with the Constitution. It sometimes
happens, however, that a Consti*tution and the national legal order under it is disrupted by an abrupt
political change not within the contemplation of the Constitution. Any such change is called a
revolution, and its legal effect is not only the destruction of the existing Constitu*tion but also the
validity of the national legal order. A revolution is generally associated with public tumult, mutiny,
violence and bloodshed but from a juristic point of view the method by which and the persons by
whom a revolution is *brought about is wholly immaterial, The change may be attended by violence or
it may be perfectly peaceful. It may take the form of a coup d'etat by a political adventurer or it may
be effected by persons already in public positions. Equally irrelevant in law is the motive for a
revolution, inasmuch as a destruction of the constitutional structure may be prompted by a highly
patriotic Impulse or by the most sordid of ends. For the purposes of the doctrine here explained a
change is, in law, a revolution if it annuls the Constitution and the annulment is effective. If the
attempt to break the Constitution fails those who sponsor or organise it are judged by the existing
Constitu*tion as guilty of the crime of treason. But if the revolution is victorious in the sense that the
parsons assuming power under the change can successfully require the inhabitants of the country to
conform to the new regime, then the revolution itself becomes a law‑creating fact because thereafter
its own legality is judged not by reference to the annulled Constitution but by reference to its own
success. On the same principle the validity of the laws to be made thereafter is judged by reference to
the new and not the annulled Constitution. Thus the essential condition to determine whether a
Constitution has been annulled is the efficacy of the change. In the circumstances supposed no new
State is brought into existence though Aristotle thought otherwise. If the territory and the people
remain substantially the same, there is, under the modern juristic doctrine, no change in the corpus or
international entity of the State and the revolutionary Government and the new constitution are,
according to International Law, the legitimate Government and the valid Constitution of the State.
Thus a victorious revolution or a successful coup d'etat is an internationally recognised legal method
of changing a Constitution.

After a change of the character I have mentioned has taken place, the national legal order must for its
validity depend upon the new law‑creating organ. Even Courts lose their existing jurisdictions, and can
function only to the extent and in the manner determined by the new Constitution. While on this
subject, Hans Kelsen, a renowned modern jurist, say;--

"From a juristic point of view, the decisive criterion of a revolution is that the order in force is
overthrown and replaced by a new order in a way which the former had not itself anticipated. Usually,
the new men whom a revolution brings to power annul only the constitution and certain laws of
paramount political significance, putting other norms in their place. A great part of the old legal order
remains valid also within the frame of the new order. But the phrase 'remains valid', does not give an
adequate description of the phenomenon. It is only the contents of these norms that remain the
same, not the reason of their validity. They are no longer valid by virtue of having been created in the
way the old constitution prescribed. That constitution is no longer in force; it is replaced by a new
constitution which is not the result of a constitutional alteration of the former. If laws which are
introduced under the old constitution continue to be valid under the new constitution, this is possible
only because validity has expressly or tacitly been vested in them by the new constitution . . . . . .

The laws which, in, the ordinary inaccurate parlance, continue to be valid are, from a juristic
viewpoint, new laws whose import coincides with that of the old laws. They are not identical with the
old laws, because the reason for their validity is different. The reason for their validity is the new, not
the old, constitution, and between the two continuity holds neither from the point of view of the one
nor from that of the other. Thus It is never the constitution merely but always the entire legal order
that is changed by a revolution.

"This shows that all norms of the .old order have been deprived of their validity by revolution and not
according to the principle of legitimacy. And they have been so deprived not only de facto but also de
jure. No jurist would maintain that even after a successful revolution the old constitution and the laws
based thereupon remain in force, on the ground that they have not been nullified in a manner.
anticipated by the old order itself. Every jurist will presume that the old order‑to which no political
reality any longer corresponds‑has ceased to be valid, and that all norms, which are valid within the
new order, receive their validity exclusively from the new con*stitution. It follows that, from this
juristic point of view, the storms of the old order can no longer be recognised as valid norms. (General
Theory of Law and State translated by Anders Wedberg, 20th Century Legal Philosophy Series, pp.
117‑118).

Bearing in mind the principle just stated let us now approach the question involved in these cases. If
what I have already stated is correct, then the revolution having been successful it satisfies the test of
efficacy, and becomes a basic law‑creating fact. On that assumption the Laws (Continuance in Force)
Order, however transitory or imperfect it may be, is a new legal order and it is in accordance with that
order that the validity of the laws and the correctness of judicial decisions has to be determined."

The rest of the judgment dealing with the interpretation of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order and
their effect on pending cases with which we are not concerned.

The judgment in State v. Dosso set the seal of legitimacy on the Government of Iskander Mirza
though he himself was deposed from office by Muhammad Ayub Khan, a day after the judgment was
delivered on the 23rd October 1958, and he assumed to himself the office of the President. The
judgments In the cases Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan ; Governor‑General Reference 1 of 1955 and The
State v. Dosso had profound effect on the constitutional developments in Pakistan. As a commentator
has remarked, a perfectly good country was made into a laughing stock. A country which came into
being with a written Con*stitution providing for a parliamentary form of Government with distribution
of State power between the Executive, Legislature, and the Judiciary was soon converted into an
autocracy and eventually degenerated into military dictatorship. From now onwards people who were
the recipients of delegated sovereignty from the Almighty, ceased to have any share in the exercise of
the State powers. An all omnipotent sovereign now ruled over the people in similar manner as the
alien commander of the army who has conquered a country and "will" alone regulates the conduct and
behaviour of the subjugated populace. Martial Law remained in force till the 7th of June 1962, when in
pursuance to a Mandate he had obtained by some kind of referendum Muhammad Ayub Khan gave a
Constitution to the country. Under it he himself became the first President ; revoked the Proclamation
of 7th October 1958 and lifted Martial Law. By and large the people accepted the Constitution and
among others the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts took oath of office under this
Constitution. All legislative and administrative acts of Martial Law authorities and the President
between 7th October 1958, and 7th June 1962, were validated by this Constitution. Some were
continued as Central Acts while others were repealed. Article 250 inter alia provided : Where a law is
repealed ; the repeal shall not affect the previous operation of the law or anything duly done or
suffered under the law, affect any right, privilege or liability, any penalty etc. Action taken under all
Martial Law Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Presidential Orders and Ordinances issued between 7th
October 1958 to 7th June 1962, were thereby validated.

In early 1965 Muhammad Ayub Khan was re‑elected as President. The general impression in the
country was that the election was rigged. Towards the end of 1958, an agitation started against his
despotic rule and the undemocratic Constitu*tion which he had imposed on the country. the agitation
gathered momentum every day and was accompanied by wide*spread disturbances throughout the
country. In February 1969, Muhammad Ayub Khan called a round table conference of political leaders
for resolving the political issues which had led to the disturbances. A solution was near insight, when
all of a sudden Muhammad Ayub Khan decided to relinquish the office of the President and asked the
Defence Forces to step in as it was "beyond the capacity of the Civil Government to deal with the
present complex situation.

In the letter written to the Commander‑in‑Chief on the 24th March 1969, Muhammad Ayub Khan said;

"It is your legal and constitutional responsibility to defend the country not only against external
aggression, but also to save it from internal disorder and chaos. The nation expects you to discharge
this responsibility to preserve the security and integrity of the country and to restore normal social,
economic and administrative life, let peace and happiness be brought back to this anguished land of
120 million people."

The Mandate given by the outgoing President to the Commander*-in‑Chief was thus to fulfil his
constitutional responsibilities; to restore law and order; and to carry out his legal duty in this behalf.

Muhammad Yahya Khan. Commander‑in‑Chief, who had taken an oath, that he will be faithful to the
Constitution of 1962 and to Pakistan, however, in disregard of his constitutional and legal duty by a
Proclamation issued on the 26th March 1969, abrogated the Constitution; dissolved the National and
Provincial Assemblies and imposed Martial Law throughout the country. This was the fourth great
constitutional mishap which befell Pakistan in less than 16 years.

On the 31st March 1969, Yahya Khan promulgated the Provisional Constitution Order which with some
variations followed the scheme of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958. It was provided that
no judgment, decree, writ or process whatso*ever shall be made or issued by any Court or tribunal
against the Chief Martial Law Administrator, Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator or any Martial Law
authority exercising power or jurisdiction under the authority of either (Article 3). Article 5 provided
that;

"5. No Court, tribunal or other authority shall call or permit to be called in question:

(a) the Proclamation ;

(b) any order made in pursuance of the Proclamation or any Martial Law Regulation or Martial Law
Order ; or

(c) any finding, sentence or order of a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court.

Article 7 (2) laid down that : "Any provision in any law providing for the reference of a detention order
to any Advisory Board shall be of no effect".

On 30th of June 1969, a Full Bench of the Punjab High Court in the case Mir Hassan and others v. The
State (1) declared that Martial Law Regulation 42 by which the case pending against the petitioner
under section 5 (2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act It of 1947 in the Court of a Special Judge was
transferred to a Military Court was, in view of the Provisional Constitution Order and Martial Law
Regulation 3, without jurisdiction and of no legal effect. It was observed by the learned Judges:

" Article 2 of Constitution (1962), declares that `every citizen of Pakistan is entitled to the protection
of the law and to be treated in accordance with law and only in accordance with law . . . . .' The Article
provides that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, body, reputation or property without due
process of law. It further declares that any public function*ary or person taking any action affecting
the life, liberty, body, property or reputation of a person or affecting his profession, trade or business
must rely on some law to justify his action. In other words, every public functionary or person must
show legal authority for interference with the right of another person. Thus a direction or order by a
public functionary would be invalid if it does not have the backing of a valid contemporaneous law. The
Chief Martial Law Administrator by preserving Article 2 of the 1962‑Constitution had made it clear
once for ail that the intention of the Government was to act in accordance with law. Therefore, the

action of any authority including Martial Law authority howsoever high (1) P L D 1969 Lah. 786 he
may be, if it had not the backing of a constitutional provision was not immune from being struck down
by the Courts of the country."

To overcome the decision of the High Court the Chief Martial Law Administrator on the same day
promulgated Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969. Articles 3 and 4 of the Order
provided:

"3. (1) No Court, tribunal or other authority, including the Supreme Court and a High Court, shall ‑‑

(a) receive or entertain any complaint, petition, application or other representation whatsoever
against, or in relation to the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by, any Special Military Court or
Summary Military Court, or any Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction
derived from Martial Law Authority;

(b) call or permit to be called in question in any manner whatsoever any finding, sentence, order,
proceeding or other action of, by or before a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court or any
Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law
Authority ;

(c) issue or make any writ, order, notice or other process whatsoever to or against, or in relation to
the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by, a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court, or
any Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law
Authority.

(2) Any decision given, judgment passed, writ, order, notice or process issued or made, or thing done
in contravention of clause (i) shall be of no effect.

(3) If any question arises as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the exercise of any powers or
jurisdiction by a Special Military Court or a Summary Military Court or a Martial Law Authority or any
other person deriving powers from a Martial Law Authority, it shall be referred to the Chief Martial Law
Administrator whose decision thereon shall be final.

(4) If any question arises as to the interpretation of any Martial Law Regulation or a Martial Law Order,
it shall be referred to the Martial Law Authority issuing the same for decision and the decision of such
Martial Law Authority shall be final and shall not be questioned in any Court, Tribunal or other
authority, including the Supreme Court and a High Court."

The Order was given retrospective effect from 25th March 1969, and was to override anything
contained in the Provisional Constitution Order, any Martial Law Regulation or any other law for the
time being in force. If any question arose as to the interpretation of any Martial Law Regulation or any
Martial.

Law Order. it was to be referred to the Martial Law authority issuing the same and the decision of the
said authority will be final and cannot be questioned in any Court, tribunal or any other authority
including the Supreme Court or a High Court.

On the 30th March 1970, Yahya Khan promulgated the Legal Framework Order and under its

provisions, elections were held in December 1970, to the National and Provincial Assemblies under the
supervision of a Judge of this Court acting as the Chief Election Commissioner. After a good deal of
political manoeuvring, the National Assembly was summoned by Muhammad Yahya Khan for the 3rd
March 1971. However, shortly before that he postponed the session indefinitely. Awami League, the
dominant political party of East Pakistan and who held a clear majority in the National Assembly
reacted to this decision very sharply. To meet the situation Military action was taken on the 25th
March 1971, which lasted for several months. These strong measures had, however, no effect on the
events which were shaping fast in the Eastern Wing. It led to an armed surrection by Awami League
and their supporters. On the 20th November 1971, Indian Armed Forces attacked East Pakistan and
on 3rd December 1971, they attacked all along the West Pakistan border and the cease‑fire line in
Kashmir. On the 16th December Pakistan Army in East Pakistan surren*dered to the Indian Army and
with the fall of Dacca on that day, the curtain fell on the illegal regime of Muhammad Yahya Khan for
ever. He resigned his office on the 20th December 1971, and was placed under arrest.

The history of the constitutional mishaps which befell Pakistan between 1953 and 1969 bringing
ruination, and untold miseries to its 120 million people, forms the overcast background against which
the Court is required to answer the questions which fall for decision in the two appeals. Firstly,
weather the proclamation of the 26th March 1969, abrogating the 1962 Constitution, became a law
creating fact, and the Courts lost their exiting jurisdiction could function only to the extent and in the
manner determined by the "Laws" promulgated by Muhammad Yahya Khan ; secondly, what is "Law"
and what should be its form and content to obtain recognition from Courts of justice; thirdly, whether
the Executive and Legislative organs of the State can deny to the Courts, the performance of their
judicial functions; and, fourthly, what is the true import of Hans Kelsen's Theory on which the decision
in The State v. Dosso is based and whether it would be acted upon by Municipal Courts.

The arguments raised by Mr. Manzur Qadir, counsel for Mrs. Zarina Gauhar, may be paced in three
different sections : (i) that the abrogation of the Constitution of 1962 and imposition of Martial Law by
General Muhammad Yahya Khan by Proclamation of March 1969, for purposes other than immediate
restoration of law and order was unconstitutional and did not at any point of time acquired legal
sanctity ; (ii) that enforceability of laws is dependent on their recognition by Courts and only "those
laws" promulgated by Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan may be recogniz*ed by Courts as are covered by
the doctrine of State necessity ; and (iii) that "laws" which purport to deprive Courts of their legal
functions and are repugnant to the basic laws of Pakistan viz. Objectives Resolution of the 7th March
1949, are void and of no legal effect.

Mr. M. Anwar appearing for Miss Asma Jilani went a step further and pleaded that notwithstanding the
consequences, all legislative measures adopted by Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan being tainted with
illegitimacy should be discarded enmass.

The Attorney‑General conceded that the decision in State v. Dosso did not lay down the law correctly
and stated that it encourag*ed revolutions and was a standing invitation to future adventurers. He,
however, maintained that as a large number of laws were promulgated and actions taken under them
both during the regime of Muhammad Ayub Khan and Muhammad Yahya Khan, the Court may uphold
those laws under the doctrine of stare decisis. He also conceded that clause (a) of Article 3 of the
Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969 in so far as it purported to deprive the
citizens from approaching Courts of law by providing that no Court will "receive" any complaint,
petition, application or other representation whatsoever was a bad law as it purported to deprive the
Courts of their judicial functions which include the jurisdiction to determine whether their jurisdiction
to entertain a cause is excluded bylaw. He further agreed that "law" is that which is recognized by
Courts and relied on the order passed by this Court in Mian Fazal Ahmad v. The State (1970 S C M R
650) in which a Bench of this Court declined to give leave to appeal from the order of the High Court
of Punjab, whereby a petition filed by the petitioner under section 561‑A, Cr. P. C. in that case to call
in question the registration of a case against him under the Sea Customs Act was dismissed on the
ground that in the meantime a Military Court had tried and convicted him.

It was argued that this Court having already recognized President's Order 3 of 1969 as a law, should
not go behind that decision. As regards the legality of the Proclamation of the 26th March 1969,
issued by Muhammad Yahya Khan; the Attorney-*General relied on the theory that habitual obedience
by people makes the de facto rule of a usurper de jure. Finally, the Attorney‑General posed the
question that if the "Laws" pro*mulgated by Muhammad Yahya Khan were illegitimate, as con*tended

by the counsel for the appellants, what will happen to the elections to the National Assembly and the
Provincial Assemblies which were held under the Legal Framework Order promulgated by Yahya Khan
on 30th March 1970.

The Advocates‑General for the Provinces of Punjab, Sind, N. W. F. P. and Baluchistan did not address
the Court.

Mr. A. K. Brohi (amicus curiae) first argued the question that Courts of law are, as a matter of legal
obligation, bound by the dictates of the 1962‑Constitution and have not been absolved of that legal
obligation by taking cognizance of the ties authority destructive of the established legal order. He also
questioned the nature of the new legal order based on the system officially described as Martial Law.
In his opinion this system was not regulated by any set of legal principles known to jurisprudence and
was merely contingent on the will and whim of one man. If so, then what was the legal status of
Courts which accept that their authority stems from one man of unbridled will? He refer*red in this
respect to the oath of office taken by the Judges under the 1962‑Constitution and maintained that
Judges have since then not taken any oath per contra or by means of any legal or formal document
accepted or declared their allegiance to any other source of legal authority. He also attacked the
decision in Dosso's case and analysed Kelsen's theory on which that decision is based. It was argued
that Kelsen's theory that a victorious revolution and successful coup d'etat are law‑creating facts is a
mere theory of law as distinguished from law itself. The function of a theory of law is to explain or to
describe the nature of law or the nature of a legal system. It is, however, itself not a part of legal
system or the law which it seeks to describe. This accord*ing to Mr. Brohi was the central fallacy in the
judgment given by Muhammad Munir, C. J. He referred to a remark by Kelsen in "What is justice"
(page 268) "the propositions of jurisprudence are not themselves norms. They establish neither duties
nor rights. Norms by which individuals are obligated and empowered issue only from the law‑creating
authority. The jurist, as the theoretical exponent of the law, presents these norms in pro*positions
that have a purely descriptive sense, statements which only describe the "ought" of the legal norm. It
is of the greatest importance to distinguish clearly between legal norms which com*prise the object of
jurisprudence and the statements of jurispru*dence describing that object. These statements were
called "rule of law" in contradistinction to the "legal norms" issued by the legal authority.

Mr. Brohi next referred to the decision in the case of Madzimbamuto v. Lardner Burke ((1968) 3 All E R
561) in which Kelsen's theory of effectiveness was applied. This case is mentioned by some authors as
the grund‑norm case. He pointed out that the decision fn this case was the maximum success which
Kelsen could have conceivably envisaged.

Mr. Brohi further explained the nature of Martial Law (i) as a law regulating discipline and other
matters determining the rules of conduct applicable to the Armed Forces; (ii) law which is imposed on
an alien territory under occupation by an Armed Force of which the classic definition was given by the
Duke of Willington when he stated in a debate in the House of Lords in 1851 as follows;

"Martial Law is neither more nor less than the will of the General who commands the Army. In fact,
Martial Law means no law at all."

and (iii) law which relates to and arises out of a situation in which the Civil power is unable to
maintain law and order and thus of necessity the Military power has to resort to the use of force In
order to re‑create conditions of tranquillity in which the civil power can re-assert its authority.
Reference was made to decided cases that the Courts of law have the authority to deter*mine the
Jurisdiction for the imposition of this type of Martial Law and also to make pronouncements regarding
its valid con*tinuance on its objective analysis of factual situation, i.e., whether the Civil power is
really unable to assert itself in the maintenance of law and order and the continued presence of the
military power is essential (R. V. Strickland) (i). In this connection Mr. Brohi referred to the
Proclamation of Martial Law, and the radio broad. c Sat of Muhammad Ayub Khan in which he said ;

"The whole nation demands that General Yahya Khan, the Commander‑in‑Chief of Pakistan Army,
should fulfil his con*stitutional responsibilities"...That "the security of the country demands that no

impediment be placed in the way of the defence forces and they should be enabled to carry out freely
their legal duties,"

and the letter he wrote to Muhammad Yahya Khan on 24th March 1969 to which reference has already
been made earlier. He also referred to the first speech of Muhammad Yahya Khan in which he said :
"My sole aim in imposing martial law is to protect life, liberty and property of the people and put the
Admini*stration back on the rails" and again "it is my firm belief that a sound, clean and honest
administration is a pre‑requisite for sane and constructive political life and for the smooth transfer of
power to the representatives of the people elected freely and Impartially on the basis of adult
franchise. It will be the task of these elected representatives to give the country a workable
constitution and find a solution of all other political, economic and social problems that have been
agitating the minds of the people". This document in the opinion of Mr. Brohi leaves no doubt that the
Martial Law which was imposed on the 26th March 1969, fell in the third category.

The various actions taken by Yahya Khan under the umbrella of Martial Law, however, proved that in
practice the Martial Law imposed by him fell in the second category. That is, law which is imposed by
invading army on a conquered territory, because it is only then as stated by the Duke of wil*lington
that the will of the army commander is law. 1f this be so, then the entire structure of all institutions in
Pakistan including the superior Courts are merely an expression or aspect of one man's will, which a
victorious military commander imposes no an alien territory and subjugated populace.

Continuing Mr. Brohi pointed out that the characteristic of all forms of civilised Government is that the
structural distribution of power is regulated by law in a manner that every functionary, no matter so
highly placed, Is the servant of the law, should a system of Government exist in which power is
regulated and derived not from law, but from force such a system cannot claim to be a legal system of
Government whatever else it may be. Dealing with the transfer of power by Muhammad Ayub Khan to
Muhammad Yahya Khan he said that with the abrogation of 1963 Constitution not only the legal
limitations on the exercise of power, but also the legal basis and source of power disappear*ed. Power
conferred by the 1962‑Constitution on the President vested in Muhammad Ayub Khan only by virtue of
the Constitu*tion. He had no other source of power outside it. His capacity to exercise transfer of
power was thus contingent on the continuance of the 1962‑Constitution. The transfer of power to the
Commander-in‑Chief by Muhammad Ayub Khan was to perform his constitu*tional obligations to
restore law and order. He had no capacity to transfer total power of the State to Muhammad Yahya
Khan. His act in transferring power to Yahya Khan was, therefore, a nullity. In any case the transfer
was to be a limited power, ad hoc and temporary under which Yahya Khan could not have
con*ceivably enjoyed unlimited power.

Lastly, Mr. Brohi argued that in Pakistan the real sovereign is God Almighty and the State of Pakistan
has a limited power of which it is a recepient as a trustee or a delegatee. On this hypothesis he
argued that the will of one man was repugnant to the grund‑norm of Pakistan, viz. the Objectives
Resolution and in Pakistan no single man could be the sole repository of state power. He referred to a
passage from his book "The Fundamental Laws in Pakistan" that according to the Western
Jurisprudence, legal sovereign are the people who give the first constitution; that in Pakistan the first
sovereign is God Almighty and the power received from Him as a delegatee or a trustee is to be
exercised by chosen representatives of the people and not by the will of one man.

Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada (amicus curiae) supported the views expressed by Mr. A. K. Brohi that the
abrogation of the 1962*Constitution by Yahya Khan was illegal and in excess and abuse of the
mandate given to him by Ayub Khan. Yahya Khan acted against his oath of office that he will be
faithful to the Constitution and owe allegiance to Government of Pakistan.

The decision in State v. Dosso was challenged by him on the grounds :‑‑

(i) that it was given in complete violation of rule of natural justice. Mr. Yahya Bakhtiar, the present
Attorney‑General, who was then counsel for Toti was not then allowed to challenge the vires of the
Laws (Continuance in Force) Order (1 of 1958) ;

(ii) Munir, C. J. disclosed after retirement that the decision was not based on judicial considerations ;

(iii) the decision was even fn disregard of oath of office of the Judges. He referred in this connection to
the decision of the Court in Fazlul Quader Chowdhury v. Mr. Mohammad Abdul Haq ;

(iv) the decision purported to legalise the so‑called revolution without any conditions which authorised
absolutism and sanctioned that might is right ;

(v) interpretation of Kelsenian theory of grund‑norm in the judgment is absolutely incorrect. He
pointed out that Kelsen has revised his own theory of grund‑norm which is now called apex norm.

(vi) that "effectiveness" was not the only criterion of legitimacy ; and

(vii) that the doctrine of state necessity was overlooked by the Court.

As regards illegal usurpation of power by Yahya Khan, Mr. pirzada referred to cases from Uganda,
Nigeria, Rhodesia and Cyprus. Two other points were made by Mr. Pirzada (i) that the doctrine of stare
decisis has no application to the present case; and (ii) that Kelsen's theory on which the decision in
Dosso's case is based is adversely criticised by some well‑known jurists. He also traced the history of
Martial Law promulgated in the sub‑Continent between 1804 to 1953. He relied among others on the
following decided cases : (1) 18 Lawyers Edition 281 1 (2) 87 Lawyers Edition 1 ; and (3) 90 Lawyers
Edition 688.

We will first deal with the validity of the Proclamation issued on the 26th March 1969, abrogating the
Constitution of 1962 and imposing Martial Law throughout the country. The legal mandate was to
restore law and order, but in practice Yahya Khan used it for the purpose of setting up his personal
rule. His will was to be the supreme law and all national institutions including Courts of justice were to
function to the extent and in the manner permitted by him. He, accordingly, issued a large number of
Martial Law Orders and Martial Law Regulations and Presidential Orders and Ordinances which were
not at all germane to his "Constitution" and "Legal" duties. Though Dacca fell on the 16th December
1971, and East Pakistan declared itself an independent State under the name Bangla Desh, Yahya
Khan had the draft of a Constitution prepared which was to be promulgated on the 20th December
1971, by a pro*clamation.

Article 16 of the draft Constitution which was printed by the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Law
and Parliamentary Affairs (Law Division) provided :‑

"16. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Con*stitution : ‑

(a) the first President of Pakistan under this Constitution shall be General Agha Muhammad Yahya
Khan, H.Pk., H.J.;

(b) General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, H.Pk., H. J., may continue to hold also the post of
Commander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army for a period not exceeding five years commencing on the
date of coming into force of this Constitution ; and

Article 260 which should be read in continuation of Article 16 provided further that the
Commander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army may declare Martial Law and shall be revoked only by the
Commander‑in‑Chief. After Martial Law is imposed

"(4) It shall be within the power of the Commander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army who shall be the
Chief Martial Law Administrator to suspend for the duration of the Martial Law, or any shorter period
as may be specified, the operation of specified provisions of this Constitution, but the said Principal
Authority shall not have power to abrogate this Constitution."

These two provisions of the Constitution which Yahya Khan proposed to impose on the country provide
historical evidence of his mala fide intention not to transfer power to the people although he made
them believe all along that he was holding the office of President temporarily to arrange smooth
transfer of power to the people.

In view of the facts narrated above, it cannot be maintained that the people had by and large,
knowingly accepted the Government of Yahya Khan and his Order as legal and by habit given
obedience to his Government. He had staged no victorious revolution or a successful coup d'etat. The
Kelsenian theory of the change of the basic norm did not, therefore, apply to the facts in which Yahya
Khan had come to assume the State powers. He obligated the people to obey his behests, but in law
they incurred no obligation to obey him.

Another view is that the Judges of Municipal Courts who have takes oath of office to preserve, protect
and defend the Constitution will not break the oath and declare that because of the superior will of the
usurper they have been relieved from their legal obligations. If the Judges find the executive organ of
the State unwilling to enforce their decrees and orders, the only course open to them is to vacate their
office. Those who are desirous of serving the usurper may take office under the Legal Order imposed
by him, but this depends upon the discretion and personal decision of the Judges and has no legal
effect. If they adopt the second course they will be acknowledging that "might" is "right" and become
collaborators with the usurper. The same result is achieved if they foreswear their oath and accept as
valid the destruction of the national order and confer recognition on the legislative, administrative,
and executive acts of the usurper. In Fazlul Quader Chowdhry v. Mr. Muhammad Abdul Haque (PLD
1963 S C 486 ) this Court observed :* -----

"The reasons why the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts have to take a similar oath
can in my opinion be found within the simple provisions of Article 58. It is there provided for all
persons in Pakistan that in my case where it becomes necessary for them to assert in their interest,
any provisions of the Constitution, they shall have access to the High Courts and through the High
Courts to the Supreme Court as of right, and these two Courts are bound by their oath and duty to act
so as to keep the provisions of the Constitution fully alive and operative, to preserve it in all respects
safe from all defeat or harm, and to stand firm in defence of its provisions against attack of any kind.
The duty of interpreting the Constitution is, in fact a duty of enforcing the provisions of the
Constitution in any particular case brought before the Courts in the form of litigation."

It should be remembered in this connection that, however, effective the Government of a usurper may
be, it does not within the National Legal Order acquire legitimacy unless the Courts recognize the
Government as de jure.

International law is not concerned with these considerations*. If a rebel Government has succeeded in
gaining effective control over people and territory the other States may recognize it. But will the same
rule apply to‑the Municipal Courts. East Pakistan today provides a classic example of a successful
revolution which destroyed the National Legal Order and became a new law* creating fact. East
Pakistan has declared its self independence and became a separate State under the name of Bangla
Dash. Pakistan claims that East Pakistan is a part of Pakistan, but a large number of States have

already recognized it as an independent State. New Courts and Government services have been
constituted in Bangla Desh which do not operate under the Legal Order of Pakistan. On these facts if a
dispute arises involving the determination whether the new Government of East Pakistan is de jure,
will the Municipal Courts of West Pakistan confer recognition on it, because a victorious revolution is a
legal method of changing the Constitution and the new order has become efficacious as the individuals
whose behaviour the new order regulates actually behave by and large in conformity with new order.
The answer is obvious. While under International law, East Pakistan has become an independent
State, the Municipal Courts of Pakistan will not confer recognition on it or act upon the legal order set
up by the rebel Government. The Kelsen theory on which the Attorney‑General relied for the
proposition that the Government of Yahya Khan was de jute and the "laws" promulgated by him are
valid is, therefore, wholly inapplicable to Municipal Courts.

Yahya Khan's Government, therefore, remained de facto and not de jute up to 20th December 19.71,
when he stepped aside.

To determine whether the Martial Law Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Presidential Orders and
Ordinances issued by him may be recognised by Courts, we must first turn to the defini*tion of "law"
as Article 2 of the Constitution of 1962, which remained operative either by its own vitality or by
virtue of the Provisional Constitution Order dated 30th March 1969, provided in unequivocal terms ;

"2.‑(1) To enjoy the protection of law, and to be treated in accordance with law, and only in
accordance with law, is the inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other
person for the time being within Pakistan.

(2) In particular‑

(a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputa*tion or property of any person shall be taken
except !n accordance with law ;

(6) no person shall be prevented from, or be hindered in, doing that which is not prohibited by law‑;
and

(c) no person shall be compelled to do 'that which the law does not require him to do."

"Law" was not defined in the Constitution. It is, therefore, for the Courts to lay down what 'law' is, and
if any decree, or behest of Yahya Khan expressed as a Martial Law Order, G Martial Law Regulation or
Presidential Order, or Ordinance, does not conform to the meaning of the term 'law' in Article 2 these
Regulations, Orders and Ordinances will be void and of no legal effect.

In Introduction to "Law In the Making" C. K. Allen men*tions two antithetic conceptions of growth of
law t (i) law is which is Imposed by a sovereign will ; and (ii) law which deve*lops within society of its
own vitality. He criticises Austin who defined "law" as the will of the sovereign and points out that
whatever be the constitutional Instrument which secures observance and enforcement of law ‑and
some sanction of this kind is certainly indispensable‑there is no historical justification for the view that
this power always and necessary be determinate, "human superior" which at the same time creates all
law. It is Impossible in every form of society governed by law to disengage and personify a
"sovereign" as thus under*stood, with the artificial precision which Hobbs and Austin assume.

Salmond describes "law" as body of principles recognized and applied by the State in the
administration of justice as the rules recognised and acted by Courts of justice. All the theories of law

are at one in viewing law as consistent of rules. Such rules are regarded by natural law as dictates of
reason, by positivism as decrees of the sovereign and by realism as the practice of the Courts. The
central notion of the natural law theory is that there exist objective moral principles which depend on
the essential nature of the universe and which can be discovered by natural reason, and that ordinary
human law is only truly law in so far as it conforms to these principles These principles of justice and
morality constitute the natural law which is valid of necessity, because the rules for human conduct
are logically connected with truths concerning human nature. Diametrically opposed to the theory of
natural law is the positivist, or imperative theory of law, it seeks to define law not by reference to its
condition, but according to the formal criteria which differentiate legal rule from other source such as
those of morals, etiquette. and so on. It is a type of command, it is laid by a political sovereign and is
enforceable by sanction. Realism, like positivism, looks on law as the expres*sion of the will of the
State as made through the medium of the Courts.

According to Holmes law is really what the Judge decides. This great American Judge sowed the seed
of the American realism in a famous paper in which he put forward a novel way of looking at law. If
one wishes to know what law is, he said, one should view it through the eyes of a bad man, who is
only concerned with what will happen to him if he does certain things. The prophecies of what the
Courts will do to the bad man, in the opinion of justice Holmes, is what he means by the law.

Paton defines "law" as the rules recognised and acted by Courts of justice. Dugit's definition is as
follows;--

"Men live together in groups and societies ; they are dependent upon, solidarist with, one another.
They have common needs which they cats satisfy only by a common life and, at the same time, they
have different needs the satisfaction of which they assure by the exchange of reciprocal services. The
progress of humanity is assured by the continuous growth, in both directions, of individual activity.
Man, so placed in society, has the obligation to realize this progress, because in so doing he realizes
himself. From the imminent force of things, therefore, there arises a rule of conduct which we may
postulate as a rule of law."

Roscoe Pound states that more than one reason led American realists which define law in terms of
judicial process. One is the central position of the Court in the Anglo‑American legal system and the
concrete character of a legal precept in that system as a product of the Courts rather than of the
univer*sities. Again, economic determinism and psychological realism lead to scrutiny of the work of
individual Judges, and skeptical relativism leads to discounting of norms and rules and autho*ritative
guides to determination. Certainly the judicial process (to which today we must add the administrative
process) is something of which a theory of the subject‑matter of jurisprudence must take account.

Kelsen has developed the theory of "Pure Law" His method and approach to law are essentially those
marked out by Kant. He does not regard law as the sum total of legal rules. Neither does he regard it
as a command or psychological process or even a social reality. In his view, it is the produce of a
mental operation. The norm which lies at the basis of his system although not arbitrary is purely
relativist and hypothetical. He claims that his initial hypothesis transforms the "might" into "law". His
theory on "Pure Law" elimi*nates the elements of ethics, politics, psychology, sociology and history.

Dias says that many writers while admiring Kelsen's struc*ture, point out, that he provides no
guidance whatever to a person in the actual application of the law. Thus, he shows how, in the process
of concretising the general norms it may be necessary to make a choice either in decision or
interpreta*tion. The Judge or the official concerned is already aware of that necessity. His need is for
some guidance as to how he should make his choice. The answer is not to be found in Kelsen's
teachings, but in value considerations of one sort or another which Kelsen sedulously eschews. In
"What is Justice" Kelsen at page 268 himself says;

"If jurisprudence is to present law as a system of valid norms, the propositions by which it describes
its object must be "ought" propositions, statements in which an "ought", not an "is", is expressed. But
the propositions of jurisprudence are not themselves norms. They establish neither duties nor rights.

Norms by which individuals are obligated and empowered issue only from the law‑creating authority.
The jurist, as the theoretical exponent of the law. presents these norms in propositions that have a
purely descriptive sense, statements which only describe the "ought" of the legal norm. It is of the
greatest importance to distinguish clearly between legal norms which comprise the object of
juris*prudence and the statements of jurisprudence describing that object. These statements may be
called "rules of law" in contradistinction to the "legal norms" issued by the legal authority."

Dias proceeds that "a legal order is not merely the sum total of laws, but includes doctrines,
principles, and standards, all of which are accepted as "legal" and which operate by influenc*ing the
application of rules. Their validity is not traceable to the grund‑norm of the order. Are these, then, to
be lumped with values and banished from a theory of law, even though they are admitted to be
"legal"? If so, it is a grave weakness in any such theory."

Scandanavian school is opposed both to Salmond and Kelsen. It believes that there is no such things
as rules, but that conformity with a rule consists really in habitual behaviour accompanied by a feeling
of being bound to act in this habitual way.

Professor Goodhart differs with Kelsen in refusing to regard basic rules (norms) as hypothesis.
According to him a norm is nonetheless a rule‑a customary rule ‑acceptance and obser*vance of which
finds expression in social practice and the general attitude of society.

Discussing the classic approach of the pure jurist to the problem of law as that of Kelsen, Laski in "The
State in Theory and Practice" points out : "The human mind, it may be said, revolts from a
jurisprudence as bare and as formal as this. It remembers the long medieval effort to identify law with
the will of God, the stoic notion of law as the voice of universal reason, the famous phrase of Utpian
which makes of law the science of distinguishing between right and wrong in human conduct. It
rejects the idea of law as that behind which there is found the sovereign power of the state . . . . .
Law, to be law, it is widely felt, must correspond with something more valid than the will of an
authority which grounds its claim to respect upon nothing more than the coercive power at its
dis*posal". Laski proceeds to say : "We must not make it mean more than it announces itself as
meaning. It is, so to speak, an abstract conceptualism in which, for certain clearly defined purposes,
law is divorced from justice and made simply a final term in a hierarchy of wills behind which it is
impos*sible to go. The jurist here is engaged on a purely formalistic analysis. He excludes from his
field of discourse all considera*tions of what is ethically right or socially expedient and considers only
as law that which emanates from a will whose source may be traced to the sovereign."

In "A Grammar of Politics" Laski adds : "To those for whom law is a simple command, legal by virtue
of the source from which it comes, it is not likely that such complexities as these will be popular. We
are urging that law is, In truth, not the will of the State, but that from which the will of the State
derives whatever moral authority it may possess . . . It assumes that the rationale of obedience. is in
all the intricate facts of social organisation and in no one group of facts. It denies at once the
sovereignty of the State, and that more subtle doctrine by which the State is at once the master and
the servant of law by willing to limit itself to certain tested rules of conduct. It insists that what is
impor*tant in law is not the fact of command, but the end at which that command aims and the way it
achieves the end. It sees society, not as a pyramid in which the State sits crowned upon the summit,
but as a system of co‑operating interests through which, and in which, the individual finds his scheme
of values. It argues that each individual scheme so found gives to the law whatever of moral rightness
it contains. "And" Any other view is seeking to Invest coercive authority with ethical content on
grounds which analysis shows to be simply the fact of the power to coerce. That power may how its
way to success, but 9t does not, by the fact of the victory, become a moral agent. We argue, rather,
that our rules of conduct are justified only as what they are in working induces our allegiance to
them".

The brief survey of the definition of "Law" will not be com*plete without quoting the observations of
Mr. Justice Matthews in the case Yick Wo. v. Hogking;

"When we consider the nature and the theory of our institu*tions of Government, the principles upon
which they are sup*posed to rest, and review the history of their development, we are constrained to
conclude that they do not mean to leave room for the play and action of purely personal and
arbit*rary power. Sovereignty itself is, of course, not subject to law, for it is the author and source of
law but in our system, while sovereign powers are delegated to the agencies of Government,
sovereignty itself remain with the people, by whom and for whom all Government exists and acts. And
the law is the definition and limitation of power. It is indeed, quite true, that there must always be
lodged some where, and in some person or body, the authority of final decision ; and, in many cases
of mere administration the responsibility is purely political, no appeal lying expert to the ultimate
tribunal of the public judgment, exercised either is the pressure of opinion or by means of the
suffrage. But the fundamental to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, considered as individual
possessions, are secured by those maxims of constitutional law which are monuments showing the
victorious progress of the race in securing the men the blessings of civilization under the reign of just
and equal, laws, so that, in the famous language of the Massachusetts Bill of Rights, the Government
of the Commonwealth "may be a Government of laws and not of men". For, the very idea that one
man may be compelled to hold his life, or the means of living, or any material right essential to the
enjoyment of life, at the mere will of another, seems to be intolerable in any country where freedom
prevails, as being the essence of salary itself."

Pakistan is an Islamic Republic. Its ideology is enshrined in the Objectives Resolution of the 7th April
1949, which inter alia declares wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in the
individual and collective spheres in accordance with the teachings and requirements of Islam as set
out in the Holy Quran and Sunnah. We should, therefore, turn more appropriately to Islamic
Jurisprudence for the definition of "law". One method of defining "law„ is to know its source. In
Shari'at law have divine origin. They are contained in the Holy Quran, and Hadith. namely, precepts
and actions of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him). The other sources are Ijma` : Consensus and
juristic deductions including Qiyas ; Analogy, Istihsan or Juristic Equity, Public Good, Istidlal ; Reason
and Ijtihad ; Juristic Exposition. While Juristic Deductions are judge‑made laws, Ijma' is based on the
docrtine of Imam Shafi'i that "the voice of the people is the voice of God", and is the most fruitful
source of law‑making in Shariat. In the present day context the Legislative Assemblies comprising of
chosen repre*sentatives of the people perform this function. Thus, In Islamic Jurisprudence, the will
of a sovereign, be he the monarch, the President or the Chief Martial Law Administrator is not the
source of law. The people as delegatee of the Sovereignty of the Almighty alone can make laws which
are in conformity with the Holy Quran and Sunnah. A remark may be added that often the head of the
State or a Province of the State is included in the composition of Legislature and if the Assembly is not
sitting he may enact Ordinances which are temporary and expire when the Assembly meets.

I have burdened this order with different theories of law not only for the purpose of finding out the
essential qualities of law, but also because during the last thirteen years or more we have so much
gone astray from the rule of law that not only the common man, but the lawyers and Judges alike
need to refresh their minds about the true import and form of law.

The preponderant view appears to be that law is not the will of a sovereign. Law is a body of principles
called‑rules or norms* recognised and applied by the State in the administration justice as rules
recognised and acted upon by the courts of justice. It must have the content and the form of law. It
should contain one or more elements on which the different theories of law are based, and give
expression to the will of the people whose conduct and behaviour the law is going to regulate. The will
of the people is nowadays often expressed through the medium of Legislature comprising of the
chosen representatives of the people. The will of a single man howsoever laudable or sordid is a
behest or a command, but is certainly not law as understood in juristic sense.

Let us now examine the provisions of Presidential Order 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation 78 of
1971 to determine whether they are at all laws in juristic sense. '

As mentioned earlier, a Full Bench of the High Court of West Pakistan (Lahore Seat) had in the case of
Mir Hassan hold that the order transferring his case under the Prevention of Corruption Act II of 1947
from the Court of the Special Judge to a Military Court was illegal. It was reasoned by the learned
Judges:‑

" .Article 2 of the 1962‑Constitution was kept intact. It declares that `every citizen of Pakistan is
entitled to the protection of the law and to be treated in accordance with law and only in accordance
with law . . .' The Article provides that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, body, reputation or
property without due process of law. It further declares that any public functionary or person taking
any action affecting the life, liberty, body, property or reputation of a person or affecting his
profession, trade or business must rely on some law to justify his action. In other words, every public
functionary or‑ person must show legal authority for interference with the right of another person.
Thus a direction or order by a public functionary would be invalid if it does not have the backing of a
valid contemporaneous law. The Chief Martial Law Administrator by preserving Article 2 of the 1962*
Constitution had made it clear once for all that the intention of the Government was to act in
accordance with law. Therefore, the action of any authority including Martial Law Authority howsoever
high he may be, if it had not the backing of a constitutional provision was not immune from being
struck down by the Courts of the country."

The judgment was announced in this case on the 30th June 1969. On the same day President's Order
3 of 1969 was issued. The purport of this order was to deny to the Courts the perfor*mance of their
judicial functions. It did not contain a body of principles which may be recognized and acted upon by
the Courts. It reflected only the will of the Chief Martial Law Administrator who ordained that no action
taken by him or by any Martial Law Authority howsoever, unjust such action may be, shall be open to
judicial review. In view of its offensive provisions, the Attorney‑General conceded that Article 3 in so
far as it laid down that "No Court, tribunal or other authority, including the Supreme Court and a High
Court, shall‑(a) receive' any complaint, peti*tion, etc., was not a law, because it is essentially within
the Jurisdiction of Courts to determine whether their jurisdiction to try a dispute is barred by law. The
same reasons applied to Art. 4 which denied to Courts the function of interpretation of laws.

Martial Law Regulation 78 of 1971 inter alia provides:

"1. The Chief Martial Law Administrator or a Martial Law Administrator or a Deputy Martial Law
Administrator authorised by the Martial Law Administrator concerned in this behalf, if satisfied with
respect to any particular person, that with a view to preventing him from acting in a seditious manner
or in a manner prejudicial to the security, the public safety or interest or the defence of Pakistan, the
maintenance of public order, Pakistan's relations with any other power, the maintenance of peaceful
conditions in any part of Pakistan, the maintenance of essential supplies and services, it is necessary
so to do, may make an order ;

(a) . ……………………………….

(b) directing that he be detained ;

There were already two laws in the field on the same subject, Safety Act of Pakistan and the Defence
of Pakistan Rules, 1965. These Rules were framed under the Defence of Pakistan Ordinance during the
1965 war with India, and re‑enacted during the 1971 war. The provisions of these two laws are similar
to the provisions of Martial Law Regulation 78. What was then the necessity for promulgat*ing Martial
Law Regulation 78. The reason is not far to seek. An order passed under the Public Safety Act or the
Defence of Pakistan Rules could be challenged in the High Court under Article 98 of the Constitution. It
was so held by this Court in the case of Malik Ghulam Jilani and Shorish Kashmiri. An order passed
under Martial Law Regulation 78 by a Martial Law authority could not, however, be challenged by
virtue of Presidential Order 3 of 1969. The object with which this Regula*tion was issued was
therefore to interfere with the judicial functions of Courts.

As both President's Order No. 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation 78 were intended to deny to the
Courts the performance of their judicial functions, an object opposed to the concept of law. Neither
would be recognised by Courts as law.

We may now turn to the methodology of law‑making during the Martial Law which was imposed by
Yahya Khan on the 26th March 1969. Pakistan came into being with a written
Constitu*tion‑Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, Ch. 2) and the India Independence Act,
1947 (10 & 11 Geo. 6, Ch. 30). These constitutional instruments were, in time, replaced by the
Constitu*tion of 1956 which in turn was substituted by the Constitu*tion of 1962. It is still in force
either by its own vitality or under the Provisional Constitution Order, 1969. The written Constitution of
a State is, according to Kelsen, its basic norm. It regulates all other legal' norms. Pakistan has
unfortunately suffered long spells of Martial Law, but its basic structure was democratic from its
inception. There was distribution of powers between the executive, legislature and judiciary. During
Martial Law the legislative powers of the State were usurped by the Executive and attempt made to
deny to Courts the exercise of judicial functions. The usurpation of legislative powers of the stage by
the Chief Martial Law Administrator was therefore against the basic norm. The new Legal Order
consisting of Martial Law Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Presidential Orders and Presidential
Ordinances was, therefore, unconstitutional and void ab initio. This Order would have become legal
only if the Government of Yahya Khan was recognized by Courts as de jure and the Order he gave to
the country was held valid. This question has already been answered in the negative.

In this connection, we may examine also the nature of Martial Law imposed by Yahya Khan on the
26th March 1969, for lest it is said that the Martial Law Regulations, and Martial Law Orders were not
laws in juristic sense, but they derived their validity from the Proclamation of the 26th March 1962'
Martial Law is of three types : (i) the law regulating discipline and other matters determining the rule
of conduct applicable to the Armed forces. We are not concerned with it ; (ii) law which is imposed on
an alien territory under occupation by an armed force. The classic function of this type of Martial Law
was given by the Duke of Willington when he stated in the House of Lords that ' "Martial Law is neither
more nor less than the will of the General who commands the Army. In fact Martial Law means no law
at all." We are also not concerned with this type of Martial Law ; and (iii) law which relates to and
arises out of a situation in which the Civil power is unable to maintain law and order and the Military
power is used to meet force and recreate conditions of peace and tranquillity in which the Civil power
can re‑assert its authority. The Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law Orders passed under this type
of Martial Law must be germane only to the restoration of peace and tranquillity and induced during
the period of unrest.

In practice, the Martial Law imposed by Yahya Khan belonged to the second category. A large number
of Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law Orders passed by him between 25th March 1969, and 20th
March 1971, had no nexus with civil disturbances. In fact, peace and tranquillity was restored in the
country within a few days of his stepping in. Martial Law should, therefore, have come to an end but
the entire structure of institutions of Pakistan in*cluding superior Courts were made to appear by
Yahya Khan as merely the expression of his will which a victorious military commander imposes on an
alien territory to regulate the conduct and behaviour of its subjugated populace. Neither Pakistan was
a conquered territory, nor the Pakistan Army commanded by Yahya Khan was an alien force to justify
the imposition of this type of Martial Law.

The Martial Law imposed by Yahya Khan was, therefore, in Itself illegal and all Martial Law Regulations
and Martial Law Orders issued by him were on this simple ground void ab initio and of no legal effect.

Let us next examine the validity of the Presidential Orders and Ordinances issued by Yahya Khan
between 26th March 1969, and 20th December 1971. He assumed the office of President on
31‑3‑1969 with effect from the 25th March 1969. Under Article 16 of the 1962‑Constitution if at any
time the President was unable to perform the functions of his office, the Speaker of the National
Assembly was to act as President. Muhammad Ayub Khan could not, therefore, transfer the office of
the President to Yahya Khan. Indeed, he did not even purport to do so. He simply asked him to
perform his constitutional and legal responsibilities. Yahya Khan, therefore, assumed the office in
violation of Article 16 of the Constitution to which he had taken oath of allegiance as
Commander‑in‑Chief. It could not, therefore, be postulated that Yahya Khan had become the lawful
President of Pakistan and was competent to promulgate Orders and Ordinances in exercise of the
legislative functions conferred by the Constitution on the President. All Presidential Orders and
Ordinances which were issued by him were, therefore, equally void and of no legal effect.

The next question which arises for determination is whether these illegal legislative acts are protected

by the doctrine of State necessity. The Laws saved by this rule do not achieve validity. They remain
illegal, but acts done and proceedings undertaken under invalid laws may be condoned on the
conditions t that the recognition given by the Court is proportionate to the evil to be averted, it is
transitory and temporary in character* does not imply abdication of judicial review. In the Southern
Rhodesian case Madzimbamuto v. Lardner Burke only those legislative acts of the de facto
Government of Smith were recognised which were necessary for the ordinary, orderly running of the
Courts and which did not defeat their rights of the citizens and in its operation did not directly or
indirectly entrench the usurpation (Field send, A. J. A.) Acts which are beneficial to the Society and
provide their welfare, such as, appointment of Judges and other public functionaries by Yahya Khan
will also be covered by the doctrine.

It has been noticed that both President's Order 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation 78 of 1971 were
intended only to deny to the Courts the performance of their judicial functions. No chaos or anarchy
would have taken place in the Society if these 'laws' were not promulgated. Both Jurisdiction of Courts
(Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regula*tion 78 are, therefore, not protected by
the doctrine of State necessity.

We will now examine the case State v. Dosso on which the Attorney‑General mainly relied in his
submissions. As mentioned earlier the decision in this case is based on the Kelsenian theory of the
change of basic norms as a result of victorious revolution and successful coup d'etat as law‑creating
facts according to International Law. It was contended by the counsel for the appellants and the
amicus curiae that (i) Kelsen's theory was not a rule of law which would have primacy or the legal
norms of the State; (ii) that as a theory it was criticised by some eminent jurists; and (iii) in any case
It was not correctly applied In the case of State v. Dosso.

To appreciate the contentions we must first understand Kelsen's theory of "Pure Law" He differs with
the theory of Imperative Law t Will of a Sovereign ; and Theory of Natural Law; Dictates of Reason; as
well as with the Theory of Realism; Practice of the Courts. Kelsen does not regard the law conceived
as the sum total of legal rules or as a will. Neither does he regard it as a command or psychological
process or even a social reality. In his view law is the product of a mental operation.

It is a phenomenon in the category of essence (das Sollen) as distinguished from the category of
existence (das Sein); which is an abstract way of saying that the science of law is a branch of
normative sciences as distinguished from natural sciences 1 which is still another abstract way of
saying that the legal rule is concerned with what the positive law says shall be, and not with the
question why positive law is obeyed or what the positive law ought to be." (Modern Theory of Law, pp.
107‑108). According to Kelsen law consists of norms which are free from elements of ethics, morals,
psychology, history, sociology, etc. They are divided into basic norms and general norms. The
document which embodies the first constitution is a real constitution, a binding norm, only on the
condition that the basic norm is presupposed to be valid. Only upon this presupposition are the
declarations of those to whom the constitu*tion confers law‑creating power binding norms. A norm the
validity of which cannot be derived from its superior norm is called a "basic" norm. All norms whose
validity may be traced back to one of the same basic norm, form a system of norms, or an order. This
basic norm constitutes, as a common source, the bond between all the different norms of which an
order consists. The ultimate hypothesis of positivism is the norm authorising the historically first
legislator. The whole function of this basic norm is to confer law‑creating power on the act of the first
legislator and on all the other acts based on the first act. The basic norm is not created in a legal
procedure by a law‑creating organ. It is not as a positive legal norm is valid.

Under the heading the "Principles of Legitimacy" Kelsen points out that legal norms may be limited in
time. The end as well as the beginning of this validity is determined only by the order to which they
belong. They remain valid as long as they have not been invalidated in the way which the legal order
itself determines. This is the principle of legitimacy. He then describes an illegitimate way of change of
legal norms. "It fails to hold in the case of a revolution, this word understood in the most general
sense, so that it also covers the so‑called coup d'etat. A revolution, in this wide sense, occurs
whenever the legal order of a community is nullified and replaced by a new order in an illegitimate
way, i.e., in a way not prescribed by the first order itself. It is in this context irrelevant whether or not
this replacement is effected through a violent uprising against those individuals, who so far have been
legitimate organs competent to create and amend the legal order. It is equally irrelevant whether the
replacement is effected through a movement emanating from the mass of the people or through

actions. From a juristic point of view, the decisive criterion of a revolution is that the order in force is
overthrown and replaced by a new order in a way which former had not itself anticipated. Kelsen then
refers to the change of the basic norm by revolution. If the old order ceases, and the new order
begins to be efficacious, because the individuals whose behaviour the new order regulates actually
behave, by and large, in conformity with the new order, then this order is considered as a valid order.
If the order remains inefficacious, then their undertaking is interpreted as illegal act, as the crime of
treason. The change of basic norm thus depends on the principle of effectiveness which is based on
the presupposition, but the norms of the old order are regarded as devoid of validity, because the old
constitution and legal norms based on this constitution, the old legal order as a whole, has lost its
efficacy; because the actual behaviour of men does so longer conform to this old legal order. Every
single nrom loses its validity when the total legal order to which it belongs loses its efficacy as a
whole. The efficacy of the entire legal order is a necessary condition for the validity of every single
nrom of the order. A conditio sine qua non, but not a conditio per quam. The efficacy of the total legal
order is a condition, but not the reason for the validity of its constituent norm. These norms are valid
not because the total order is efficacious, bat because they are created in a constitutional way.

The legality of the revolutionary Government is thus based upon a presupposed basic norm which is
mentioned by Kelsen in the Chapter "The Unity of National and International Law" under the heading
"Revolution and Coup d'etat and Law, Creating Facts. According to International Law" Kelsen says :
that victorious revolution and successful coup d'etat are law. creating facts. To assume that the
continuity of national law, nor what amounts to the same the identity of the state, is not affected by
revolution or coup d'etat, as long as the territory and the population remain by and large the same, is
possible only if a norm of international law is presupposed recognising victorious revolution and
successful coup d'etat as legal methods of changing the constitution". Kelsen is a great exponent of
International Law while many jurists think that there is no such thing as International Law and that its
principles are applicable only to the extent that the national legal order of a State adopts them. Kelsen
postulates that the basic norms of all the States are in themselves norms of the International law. He
says, "only because modern jurists‑consciously or unconsciously‑presupposed International law as a
legal order determining the existence of the State in every respect, according to the principle of
effectiveness, do they believe in the continuity of national law and the legal identity of the State in
spite of a violent change of the constitution. In regulating, by its principle of effectiveness, the
creation of the constitution of the State, International law also determines the reason of the validity of
all national legal orders." So it becomes clear that Kelsen invests revolutionary Government wit legal
authority on the basis of a presupposed norm that the victorious revolution and successful coup
d'etate are law‑creating v facts. This is in the realm of a theory and not a part of the national legal
order of any State. No municipal Court will, therefore, rely on it as a rule. It is a statement of law by
Mr. Kelsen to which a large number of jurists have taken exception.

What Kelsen has said about the legitimacy of norm and legal authority of a revolutionary Government
must be read separately and not mixed up. While revolution may destroy the existing national legal
odor base after the change the reality of the State has disappeared from behind that order, It does not
follow that the legal order, which replaces it, is the expression of the superior will of one or more
revolutionaries who staged victorious revolution or successful coup d'etat. This is explained by Kelsen
himself in the remark, quoted above, that "the efficacy of the entire legal order is a necessary
condition for the validity of every single norm of the order. A conditio sine qua non but not a conditio
per quam. The efficacy of the total legal order is a condition, but not the reason for the validity of its
constituent norm. These norms are valid not because the total order is efficacious, but because they
are created in a constitutional way." So, after a change is brought by a revolu*tion or coup d'etat, the
State must have constitution and subject itself to that order. Every single norm of the new legal order
will be valid not because the order is efficacious, but because it is made in the manner provided by the
constitution of the State. Kelsen, therefore, does not contemplate an all omnipotent President and
Chief Martial Law Administrator sitting high above the society and handing its behests downwards. No
single man can give a constitution to the society which, in one sense, is an agreement between the
people to live together under an Order which will fulfil their expectations, reflect their aspirations and
hold promise for the realisation of their selves. It must, therefore, embody the will of the people which
is usually expressed. through the medium of chosen representatives. It must be this type of
constitution from which the norms of the new legal order will derive their validity.

If my appraisal of Kelsen is correct, then the decision in the case State v. Dosso upholding the validity
of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order must be held to be erroneous. The Court ought to have
acted in the same manner as it partially did In the Governor‑General's Reference No. 1 of 1955 and
directed the President to call the National Parliament and adopt a new Constitution. Unless this
direction was complied with, no new legal order would have come into being for neither Iskander
Mirza nor Muhammad Ayub Khan could become a valid source of law‑making. How could the Court

accept one or the other as a law‑making fact. No valid law can come into being from the foul breath or
smeared pen of a person guilty of treason against the national order. This reasoning applies with
greater force to the abrogation of the Constitution of 1962 by Yahya Khan on the 26th March 1969.
The legal order imposed by him in the form of Martial Law Regulations and Orders and President's
Orders and Ordinances were, therefore, tainted with illegality and would not be recognized by Courts.

Dias criticises the theory of Kelsen on which the decision in State v. Dossois based. Kelsen as a legal
philosopher excluded from his theory of Pure Law of psychological, historical, sociological and ethical
considerations. He Is not mindful as to how many revolu*tions take place in a country or into how
many bits it falls apart as a result of his theory of victorious revolution and successful coup d'etar as
law‑making facts. Society, however, will not countenance such a phenomenon with equanimity. My
own view is that person who destroys the national legal order in an illegitimate manner cannot be
regarded as a valid source of law‑making May be, that on account of his holding the coercive
apparatus of the State, the people and the Courts are silenced temporarily, but let it be laid down
firmly that the order which the usurper imposes will remain illegal and Courts will not recognize its
rule and act upon them as de jure. As soon as the first oppor*tunity arises, when the coercive
apparatus falls from the hands of the usurper, he should be tried for high treason and suitably
punished. This alone will serve as a deterrent to would be adventurers.

Before concluding the examination of Kelsen's theory of effectiveness, it may be mentioned that
basides State v. Dosso, it was applied in three other cases. The first case is from South Rhodesia
Madzimbamuto v. Lardner‑Burke. In 1965, Smith Government overthrew the 1961‑Constitution given
to South Rhodesia, by the British Government and attempted to enforce its own laws. On several
occasions Courts of law in South Rhodesia declined to recognize the "new laws". One of them being
the detention law under which Lardner‑Burke was detained. Dealing with its validity Beadle, C. J., the
Chief Justice of the High Court held that "the status of the present Government today is that of a fully
de facto Government in the sense that it is in fact in effective control of the territory and this control
seems likely to continue", and, that "the present Government, having effectively usurped the
Governmental powers granted Rhodesia under the 1901‑Constitution, can now lawfully do anything
which its predecessors could lawfully have done, but until its new constitution is firmly established and
thus becomes the de jure constitution of the territary, its administrative and legislative acts must
conform to the 1961‑Constitution. Qunet, J.P. Macdonald, J. A., and Jarvis, A. J., generally agreed in
the opinion given by Beadle, C. J. Fieldsond, A. J. A., expressed the view that "a Court created in
terms of a written constitution has no jurisdiction to recognise, either as a de jure or de facto
Government and Government other than that constitutionally appointed under that constitution". He
went on to consider the doctrine of necessity and concluded: "Necessity, however, provides a basis for
the acceptance as valid by this Court of certain acts of the present authorities, provided that the Court
is satisfied that‑(a) any administrative or legislative act is directed to and reasonably required for the
ordinary orderly running of the country ; (b) the just rights of citizens under the 1961‑Constitution are
not defeated; and (c) there is no consideration of public policy which precludes the Court from
upholding the act, for instance if it were intended to or did in fact in its operation directly further or
entrench the usurpation. . ." The decision was set aside by the Privy Council. Lord Reid delivering the
majority judgment rejected the Kelsen's theory of effectiveness and held;---

"With regard to the question whether the usurping Government cap now be regarded as a lawful
Government much was said about de facto and de jure Governments Those are conceptions of
international law and in their Lordships' view they are quite inappropriate in dealing with the legal
position of usurper within the territory of which he has acquired control. As was explained in
Carl‑Zeiss‑Stiftung v. Raynor & Keelor Ltd. (No. 2) (1966) 2 All E R 536 ; (1967) 1 A C 853 when a
question arises as to the status of a now regime in a foreign country the Court must ascertain the
view of Her Majesty's Government and act on It as correct. In practice the Government have regard to
certain rules, but those are not rules of law. And it happens not infrequently that the govern*ment
recognise a usurper as the de facto Government of a territory while continuing to recognise the ousted
Sovereign as the de jure Government. But the position is quite different where a Court sitting in a
particular territory has to determine the status of a new regime which has usurped power and
acquired control of that territory."

It was mentioned by Mr. Brohi that the view expressed by the Judges of the High Court of Rhodasia
was the maximum success for the theory of effectiveness which Kelsen could have conceivably
envisaged.

There are three other cases: one from Uganda; the other from Nigeria; and the third from Cyprus, on
the same subject, but it is unnecessary to recount their facts. In Uganda v. Commis*sioner of Prisons
(1966 B A I R 514), Sir Udo Udoma, C. J., following the State v. Dosso relied on the Kelsen's principles
in arriving at the conclu*sion that the 1966‑Constitution is a legally valid Constitution and the
supreme law of Uganda and that the 1962‑Constitution having been abolished by a victorious
revolution, fn law, does no longer exist, nor does it now form part of the laws of Uganda, it having
been deprived of its de facto and de jure validity.

We have not seen the case from Nigeria & Cyprus, but were informed that the line of reasoning runs
through them. All these decisions are open to the common objections, firstly that Kelsen's theory of
Pure Law was not a norm of the national order and a Court of justice could not have relied on it in
preference to the municipal laws. This is brought out by Kelsen himself in "What is Justice", page 286,
wherein he says : "It is of the greatest importance to distinguish clearly between legal norms which
comprise the object of jurisprudence and the statements to jurisprudence describing that object These
statements may be called "rules of law" in contradistinction to the "legal norms" issued by the legal
authority."

Secondly, Kelsen's theory of Pure Law stands in opposition to other theories of law, such as, Natural
Law which is based on Reason and Realism which is based upon the practice of Courts. What is said by
Kelsen is, not the last word He has his critics. With respect to the great Jurist, I question his
statement that "It is equally irrelevant whether the replace*ment is effected through a movement
emanating from the mass of people or through actions from those in governing positions. From a
juristic point of view, the decisive criterion of a revolu*tion is that the order in force is overthrown and
replaced by a new order". In one case the body politic has risen against an unrepresentative
Government which has imposed a tyrinical Order on the people. They overthrew that Order and gave
themselves a Constitution which will fulfil their aspirations holds promise of happiness and
self‑realization, and induces-*allegiance. In the other case one or more persons "stage a victorious
revolution" or "a successful coup d'etate", stifle the aspirations of the people, deprive them of their
basic rights and cajole them into obedience. Kelsen as a legal philosopher should have preferred the
former as legal rather than recognize the rule of might as de jure. I differ, therefore, with the theory
of Kelsen on which the decision in the State v. Dosso is based.

As regards the application of the Kelsenian theory as mentioned already Mr. Iskander Mirza, and Mr.
Ayub Khan had joined hands on the night between 7th and 8th October 1958, to overthrow the
national legal order unmindful of the fact that by abrogating the 1956‑Constitution they were not only
committing acts of treason, but were also destroying for ever the agreement reached after laborious
efforts between the citizens of East Pakistan and citizens of West Pakistan to live together as one
Nation. The cessation of East Pakistan thirteen years later is, in my view, directly attributable to this
tragic incident. On the 10th October 1958, Mr. Iskander Mirza promulgated the Laws (Continuance in
Force) Order 1 of 1958. Mr. Yahya Bakh*tiar the present Attorney‑General who was counsel for Toti
one of the respondents in the appeals disposed of alongwith the case of Dosso stated from the bar
that on his way to Lahore for appearing before the Supreme Court, he read the text of the order in a
daily newspaper. He found Mr. Fayyaz Ali, the then Attorney*-General, present in Court to move a
Reference by the President in the advisory jurisdiction of the Court presumably relating to the validity
of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order. After a hurried consultation in the Chamber of the Chief
Justice Mr. Fayyaz Ali did not move the Reference and the Court raised this issue without giving him an
opportunity to argue against it. Judgment in the case was announced on 27th October 1958. The
State appeals were allowed on the finding that by virtue of the provisions of Article 7 of the Laws
(Continuance in Force) Order the writs issued by the High Court setting aside the conviction of Dosso
and others had abated. On the following day Mr. Iskander Mirza was deposed and Muhammad Ayub
Khan assumed to him the office of President.

In was questioned how did the Court come to hold on the 13th October 1958, that the new
Government was able to maintain its Constitution in an efficacious manner and that the old order as a
whole had lost its efficacy "because the actual behaviour of men does no longer conform to this old
legal order." Indeed, it was the recognition by the Court which made the now Government de jure and
its Constitution efficacious.

Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada drew our attention in this connection to the following extract from the Book

"Friends Not Masters" by Muhammad Ayub Khan :‑

"Meanwhile, the army's legal experts came up with the opinion that since the Constitution had been
abrogated and Martial Law declared, and a Chief Martial Law Administrator appointed, the office of
President was redundant. That according to their light, was the legal position. I said 'Now, don't you
chaps start creating more problems for me. Why do you bother me? It will serve no useful purpose."

"Chief Justice Munir was there, I think, when this point came up for discussion. He had been advising
Iskander Mirza about certain matters before the revolution. I called him and thought that I would see
Iskander Mirza too. I asked Colonel Qazi to state his point of view. His position was that the President,
no longer had any place in the new arrangement, Munir disagreed. I told Qazi, 'I agree with Munir.
This is final. Accept this as a decision: I then asked him to leave."

In a rejoinder published in the Pakistan Times, dated 11th November 1968, under the title "The Days I
Remember" by Muhammad Munir, C. J. (Retired) after recounting his past association with Iskander
Mirza proceeded to state:‑

"Some months before the 1956‑Constitution was to come into force he (Iskander Mirza) casually
mentioned to me that things were going bad to worse and that he intended to assume supreme power
by dismissing the Ministers and dissolving the Assembly. He did not tell me that he intended to
introduce Martial Law though he often used to say that the politicians were not to forget the army. He
had not invited my opinion on the subject, but I pointed out to him that at that time he had little
ground for taking the steps he was contemplating and that he should have the elections held under
the new Constitution.

MARTIAL LAW

This happened perhaps in April and except at a lunch at Nathiagali I had no occasion to meet him until
the Constitu*tion having been abrogated and Martial Law declared in October 1958, I was summoned
to Karachi. The President's proclamation abrogating the Constitution and introducing Martial Law was
announced on the night of 7th October 1958. We in Lahore heard of it on the morning of 8th October
add I of once realised the legal implications of what had happened if its legality was not questioned
and professional politicians acquiesced in it. Though all laws, Courts and other civil authorities had lost
their previous jurisdiction I did not stop the Supreme Court from functioning because I felt that the
Supreme Court on being properly moved still had the right to say whether what had happened was
legal or illegal.

On the morning of 9th October, General Mohammad Azam Khan, who was the Zonal Martial Law
Administrator of Lahore, came to me and asked me whether I was aware of the legal implications of
what had happened. He told me that Courts, including the Supreme Court had lost their jurisdiction
and could function only to the extent the President or Chief Martial Law Administrator determined. He
expressed his willingness to get for me such powers as I needed to run the judiciary. I told him that I
had not made up my mind to stay or to go and that I wanted time to think over the matter. A few
hours later I received through the army a message from the President calling me to Karachi.
Accordingly I took the first available plane and flew to Karachi. General Burki who had a subtle smile
on his face also travelled by the same plane.

At Karachi I was told that subject to any order by the President or Regulation by the Chief Martial Law
Administrator it was intended to keep the existing laws and the jurisdiction of the civil authorities
alive, and that I was to scrutinise the draft instrument which the Law Secretary had been required to
prepare with that object. I was happy that some sort of civil Government and part of the Constitution
were being restored. Therefore I saw the draft prepared by Sir Edward Snelson, and In a meeting
which was attended by the President and Chief Martial Law Administrator who was accompanied by a
young army officer, the Law Secretary and myself, I suggested certain modifications, particularly with

reference to the superior Courts powers to issue writs and validation of judgments which had been
delivered after the proclamation. The instrument was entitled the Laws Continuance in Force Order
and purported to be promulgated in the name of the President."

It was urged by Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada that the Chief Justice having associated himself with the
drafting of The Laws (Continuance in Force) Order on the 9th October 1958, was in principle precluded
from sitting in judgment on its validity. I can only venture to observe that no one was more deeply
initiated in judicial propriety than the learned Chief Justice.

However, there is another aspect. Article 163 of the 1956* Constitution provided that the law declared
by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all Courts in Pakistan and that all executive and judicial
authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in aid of the Supreme Court. By laying down the law that
victorious revolution and successful coup d'etat are internationally recognised legal methods of
changing a constitution and that the revolution itself become" a law‑creation fact, and that Court can
function only to the extent and in the manner declared by the new constitution, this Court closed the
minds of all the Courts subordinate to it and bound down the hands of all executive authorities to
accept the new Government as de jure. The Attorney. General did not hesitate in acknowledging that
the decision in this case encourages revolutions and that it held out promise to future adventurers
that if their acts of treason are crowned with success, Courts will act as their hirelings. No Judge who
is true to the oath of his office can countenance such a course of action. Thus, with greatest respect to
the learned Judges who are parties to the decision in the State v. Dosso we feel constrained to
overrule it and hold that the statement of law contained in it is not correct.

It now remains to deal with the doctrine of stare decisis on which the Attorney‑General relied for
recognition of the Martial Law Regulations, Martial Law Orders, and Presidential Orders and Ordinance
issued by Yahya Khan between the 25th March 1969 and the 20th December 1971. Besides State v.
Dosso he relied on The Province of East Pakistan v. Mehdi Ali Khan and others (P L D 1959 S C (Pak.)
387 ), Tanvir Ahmad Siddiqi v. Province of West Pakistan (P L D 1968 S C 185) and Fazal Ahmad v.
The State (1970 S C M R 650). The learned Judges in The Province of East Pakistan v. Mehdi Ali Khan
were parties to the case State v. Dosso. In Tanvir Ahmad Siddiqi v. The Province of East Pakistan the
validity of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, was not challenged. In Fazal Ahmad v. The
State by a short order leave to appeal was refused by a Bench of this Court with the remarks: "when
the Military Court took cognizance of the offence and imposed penalty upon the petitioner, the learned
Judge of the High Court was right in dismissing the petitioner's application under section 561‑A of the
Code of. Criminal Procedure" A case under section 167 of the Sea Customs Act was registered against
Fazal Ahmad by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Lahore Cantt ; he thereupon moved the High
Court for quashing the proceedings whereupon a learned Judge gave an interim direction to the
Deputy Superintendent of Police to appear before him and produce file of the case and not to put up a
challan against the petitioner in any Court. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, however, put up the
challan before a Military Court whereupon Fazal Ahmad moved the High Court for initiating contempt
proceedings against the Deputy Superintendent of Police. In the meantime, the Military Court
convicted the petitioner and the High Court took no further action in the case on these facts leave to
appeal was refused by a bench of this Court. The question whether the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal
of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969 was ultra vires of the Provisional Cons*titutional Order was not even
raised in the petition for leave to appeal. There is no mention in it of any provision of that order which
purported to exclude jurisdiction of the Courts to call in question the orders passed by the Martial Law
authorities.

Stare desists is the rule of expediency and public policy and is not inflexible and will not be applied
where injustice is done or injury caused. This rule will also not apply if the language is not ambiguous.
It will apply where two interpretations are open and Court having adopted one interpretation it may
not depart from it, if it upsets contracts, titles and marriages, etc we were referred to the case of
Governors of the Campbell College Belfast v. Commissioner of Valuation for Northern Ireland ((1964)
2 All E R 705). it was held in this case that notwithstanding the long‑standing practice of confining
exemption for educational charities to those of an eleemosynary nature the Court was not required to
refrain from giving effect to the true construction of section 2 of the Act of 1854‑either by the doctrine
of contemporanea expositio or by the doctrine of stare decisis for considering the practical defect, the
importance of correcting the law with regard to rating outweighed in the present case any
embarrassment that might be caused by allowing in the appeal.

Reference was also made to a decision from a foreign jurisdiction that so far as constitutional
interpretation is concerned there is very little scope of the application of stare decisis. In the case
Federation of Pakistan v. Maul vi Tamizuddin Khan it was contended on behalf of the respondent that
because for several years no assent to an Act of the Constituent Assembly, while sitting as a
constitution‑making body under subsection (1) of section 8 of the Indian Independence Act was ever
obtained and that some important Acts passed by the Assembly were treated as law by everyone
concerned, though they had not received the assent of the Governor‑General under subsection (3) of
section 6 must be so interpreted as not to be applicable to the legislations passed by the Constituent
Assembly under subsection (1) of section 8. In refuting the submission Munir, C. J. referred to cases
cited in Crawford's "Statutory Construction" and Coolay's "Constitutional Limitation" and observed ;

"In all the cases where observations of this kind have been made, the true intention of the particular
provisions in the con*stitution was ambiguous or doubtful, and I know of no instance where the words
of the constitution being clear and consistent with a reasonable interpretation, any Court ever went to
the extent of. misconstruing its true purpose merely because somebody else had taken a mistaken
view of it. There is no question of estoppel in such cases, the correct description of the reasoning
employed being argument ab inconvenienti. This mode of construction of written constitutions is,
therefore, subject to an overriding consideration which has thus been stated by Coollay himself at
pages 149‑150."

This view is supported by Mr. Brohi, in his Book, "Fundamental Law of Pakistan", page 598 : It is said:
"In the matter of constitutional adjudications the rule of stare decisis has, if at all, limited application".

Whatever be the scope of stare decisis and its limited application to the interpretation of constitutional
instruments, Kelsen's theory on which Munir, C. J., relied was neither a norm of the National Legal
Order, nor a statutory provision. Its application in upholding the "victorious revolution" by Iskander
Mirza did not, therefore, attract the doctrine of stare dectsis. Moreover, it cannot be said that a right
was created in Yahya Khan to rebel against the National Legal Order on the basis of the decision in the
State v. Dosso.

The Attorney‑General next contended that if all the laws given by Yahya Khan were declared to be
invalid, the same would apply to the Legal Framework Order under which the elections to the National
Assembly and Provincial Assemblies were held in December 1970. This contention was effectively
answered by Mr. Manzur Qadir who stated that the concept of validity is derived from the will of
body‑politic. If the body* politic gives an express answer that answer is valid and It does not matter
who puts the question. He also pointed out a distinction between the status of a person who acquires
power and the limits in which he exercises his power. The legality of the elections to the National and
the Provincial Assemblies under the Legal Framework Order cannot, therefore, be doubted on the
ground that Yahya Khan had no legal authority to promulgate this Order.

The Attorney‑General lastly urged that by challenging the validity of Martial Law imposed by Yahya
Khan who was no longer in power the intention, in fact, was to dispute the legality of the present
Government. In reply, Mr. Manzur Qadir acknowledged the legitimacy of the Government headed by
Mr. Zufiqar Ali Bhutto as Chairman of the majority party in the National Assembly and said It was
based on the will of the chosen representatives of the people. This was the reason behind the plea
raised by him that the invalidity in the Legal Framework Order did not affect the legality of the
Elections held under it to the National Assembly and Provincial Assemblies. This coincided with the
position taken up by the Attorney. General that Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was not the recipient of power
from Yahya Khan and that he held the office of the President as Leader of the majority party In the
National Assembly. We also take judicial notice of the fact that after arguments were concluded in
these appeals, the National Assembly met and unanimously expressed confidence in the Government
of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto. An Interim Constitu*tion has also been passed and Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto is
to be inaugurated as President under this Constitution on the 21st April 1972. The legitimacy of the
present Government is thus beyond the shadow of doubt.

The text of the Interim Constitution adopted by the National Assembly on the 17th April 1972, has
been published in the newspapers. Article 280 provides;-

"280.‑(1) Except as provided by this Article, all existing laws shall, subject to this Constitution,
continue in force, so far as applicable and with the necessary adaptations, until altered, repealed or
amended by the appropriate Legislature.

(2) The Proclamation made on the twenty‑fifth day of March 1969, is revoked with effect as from the
commencing day, and the Orders specified in the Sixth Schedule and any Orders amending those
Orders are repealed with effect as from that day, but this clause shall not affect any existing laws
made under those Orders.

(3) All Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law Orders, except the Martial Law Regulations and the
Martial Law Orders specified in the Seventh Schedule, are repealed with effect as from the
commencing day, and on that day each Martial Law Regulation and the Martial Law Orders so specified
shall be deemed to have become an Act of the appropriate Legislature and shall, with the necessary
adapta*tions, have effect as such.

Article 281 further provides

"281.‑(1) All Proclamations, President's Orders, Martial Law Regulation, Martial Law Orders, and all
other laws made as from the twenty‑fifth day of March 1969, are hereby declared, notwithstanding
any judgment of any Court to have been validly made by competent authority, and shall not be called
in ques*tion in any Court.

(2) All orders made, proceedings taken and acts done by any authority, or by any person, which were
made, taken or done, or purported to have been made, taken or done, on or after the twenty‑fifth day
of March 1969, in exercise of the powers derived from any President's Orders, Martial Law
Regulations, Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications, rules, orders or bye‑laws, or in execution
of any orders made or sentences passed by any authority in the exercise or purported exercise of
powers as aforesaid, shall be deemed to be and always to have been validly made, taken or done.

(3) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie in any Court against any authority or any person for or
on account of or in respect of any order made, proceedings taken or act done, whether in the exercise
or purported exercise of powers referred to in clause (2), or in execution of or in compliance with
orders made or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of such powers.

The intended effect of these constitutional provisions is that among other Martial Law Regulations and
Orders, Martial Law Regulation 78 and Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order 3 of 1969 will
be deemed to have been validly made, but this is so not because Yahya Khan was competent in law to
promulgate theca laws. They are valid, because the new Constitution of the State adopts them as
constituents of the National Legal Order as from the commencing day, i.e. 21st April 1972, with
retrospective effect from the 25th March 1969. In the words of Kelsen: If laws which were introduced
under the old Consti*tution continue to be valid under the new Constitution this is possible only
because validity has expressly or tacitly been vested in them by the new Constitution. The
phenomenon is a case of reception. The laws which, in the ordinary inaccurate parlance, continue to
be valid are, from a Juristic viewpoint, new laws whose import coincides with that of the old laws.
They are not identical with the old laws, because the reason for their validity is different.

Article 9 of the Interim Constitution secures Fundamental Rights including the right that no law
providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a period exceeding
three months unless the appropriate Advisory Board has reviewed his case and reports before the
expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such
detention: "Provided that such law shall also provide that the case of the person detained shall be
brought before the appropriate Advisory Board for the first review within one month of the order of

detention". Advisory Board means a Judge of the Supreme Court and Senior Officer in the service of
Pakistan in relation to a person detained under a Federal law and a Judge of the High Court and a
Senior Officer of the service of Pakistan in the case of a person detained under a Provincial Law.
Martial Law Regulation 78 contains no such safeguards. Article 7(1)(2) declares:

"7.‑ (1) Any law, or any custom or usage having the force of law, in so far as it is a inconsistent with
the rights conferred by this Chapter, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

(2) The State shall not make any Law which takes away or abridges the rights so conferred and any
law made in contraven*tion of this clause shall, to the extent of such contravention, be void."

The First Schedule to the Constitution specifies Presidential Orders, Martial Law Regulations, and Acts
passed by the National and Provincial Assemblies which are exempted from the operation of Article
7(1) and (2). Martial Law Regulation 78 and President's `Order 3 of 1969 are not included in the
Schedule.

As seen Article 280 itself provides: all existing laws shall subject to this Constitution continue in force.
Martial Law Regulation 78 has been repealed, but if it was continued being repugnant to Fundamental
Rights contained in Article 9 it would have been void under Article 7(1). It follows that if the orders of
detention passed under Martial Law Regulation 78 are by virtue of Articles 280 and 281 deemed to
have been validly made, they would become unlawful from the commencing day, i.e. 21st April 1972.
This result would have been avoided only if Martial Law Regulation 78 was continued as an Act of the
appropriate Legislature and included in the 1st Schedule to the Constitution. The orders under which
Malik Ghulam Jilani and Mr. Altaf Gauhar are being detained will, therefore, be liable to be set aside on
the ground that continuation of their detention is in violation of Fundamental Rights.

On the findings recorded above, I will allow both the appeals and direct that the detenus be released
forthwith unless required to be detained under any other lawful order.

SAJJAD AHMAD, J.‑These two detention cases of Malik Ghulam Jilani and Mr. Altaf Gauhar, under
Martial Law Regu*lation No. 78 promulgated by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan in the
purported exercise of his powers as the Chief Martial Law Administrator, have spurted delicate
constitutional and legal questions seemingly tied up with political concomitants. However, in the
resolution of causes coming for determination before a Judge, his mind is sealed off against any
extraneous influence. True to his sacred oath, he has to decide them to the best of his ability in
accordance with law, doing justice to all manner of people, without fear or favour, malice or ill‑will.
The importance of the issues involved, which have engrossed my mind ever since the commencement
of these proceedings in this Court, under the constant stress of my judicial oath, have impelled me to
add my voice by this separate note to the weighty pronouncements made in the very elaborate and
erudite judgments of my Lord, the Chief Justice and my brother M. Yaqub Ali, J. with whose
conclusions I respectfully agree.

In fact, these judgments of my Lords and I say so unfeignedly, in their exhaustive discussion of all the
salient points arising in these cases, leaves little or nothing to be added. It must also be gratefully
acknowledged that all the related questions were argued before us in very great depth, with diligent
research and marked ability by the learned counsel for the appellants, the learned Attorney‑General,
and Mr. Brohi and Mr. Sharifuddin Pirzada, who had appeared as amicii curiae at our request. In
historical retrospect, they have called to mind the anguished memory of the constitutional tragedies
that have afflicted this Muslim homeland of our dreams, playing havoc with the body politic. Twice the
Constitution was abrogated, the abrogation being preceded and followed by reckless material greed,
scramble for power and free run for political ambition and adventurism. On each occasion, the
abrogation of the Constitution, first in 1958 and again in 1969, was accompanied by the simultaneous
clamping of Martial Law on the entire country, associated with its accursed terror and its potential
mischief of coercive action in the destruc*tion of democratic values and civilised pattern of life in the

country. Contrary to its conventional and limited purpose in the domestic sphere to suppress turmoil
and civil strife by the Civil Administration with the aid of the army, the Martial Law in Pakistan has
come to mean the complete subjugation of all juris*dictions to the arbitrary will of one individual,
who, by his for*tuitous position as the head of the army for the time being becomes the
self‑appointed repository of all the State powers as the Chief Martial Law Administrator, wielding
unbridled authori*ty in the land. In this sense, Martial Law operates as if it were a part of jus belli
imposed by the invading army on a foreign land brought into subjugation by conquest. Such a Martial
Law, as once described by Lord Wellingdon in the House of Commons, is "nothing more nor less than
the will of the general commanding the army. It is in fact no law at all." It cannot be gainsaid that
after the bitter and ugly experiences of the two Martial Laws suffered by the nation within the span of
the last 14 years, the very name of Martial Law has become an anathema and it is intolerably
repugnant to the common people regardless of its necessity or potentiality for doing any public good,
which cannot otherwise be done.

The story is long and painful, but for purposes of these appeals, it is not necessary to go beyond
25‑3‑69, when with the exit of F.M. Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of Pakistan, General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, the then Com*mander‑in‑Chief of the Pakistan Army, was ushered on
the political scene. In his letter of March 24, 1969, the Field‑Marshal, depict*ing the political and
economic chaos that had overtaken the country, invited him to discharge his legal and constitutional
responsibilities to defend the country not only against external aggression but also to save it from
internal disorder and chaos.

Simultaneously, General Yahya Khan issued a Martial Law Proclamation on March 25, 1969, assuming
to himself the powers of the Chief Martial Law Administrator and the Commander of the Armed Forces.
On 31st March 1969, he also appointed himself as the President and assumed that office with effect
from the 25th of March 1969. This was followed by the promulgation of the Provisional Constitution
Order on the 4th of April 1969, by which it was ordained that notwithstanding the abrogation of the
Constitution of 1962, the State of Pakistan shall be governed as nearly as may be, in accordance with
the said Constitution, subject to any regulations or orders made from time to time by the Chief Martial
Law Administrator. It hardly needs any argument to show that General Yahya Khan at the receiving
end overstepped the mandate of the Field Marshal, as contained in the letter men*tioned above, even
if it were assumed to have any legal validity. But this mandate was wholly misconceived. Under Article
12 of the Constitution, which was then in force, if F. M. Muhammad Ayub Khan found himself unable to
cope with the crisis created in the country, he should have resigned his office under Article 12 of the
Constitution then in force, and the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly could then have stepped in his
place under Article 16 thereof till the election of the new incumbent for that office within 90 days of
that event. Alternatively, a state of emergency could have been declared under Article 30 of the
Constitution and the military could have been summoned in aid of the Civil adminis*tration to quell
the disturbances and to restore law and order. However, General Yahya Khan, instead of doing his
constitutional duty, did not lose a minute to jettison the Constitution to the winds, which he had
undertaken by his oath as an army officer to defend and protect. Further he arrogated to himself the
supreme powers of the Chief Martial Law Administrator. This assumption of power by General Yahya
Khan was utterly an illegitimate and unconstitutional act of usurpation, which can, on no legal or valid
basis, be accorded a de jure status by the Law Courts.

This position was not seriously contested by the learned Attorney‑General, who has, however, argued
that the very fact that General Yahya Khan took reins of power by overthrowing the old order in a
manner not contemplated by the existing Con*stitution, amounted to a coup d'etat or a revolution on
his part, which is an internationally recognised mode of changing the Con*stitution, thereby setting up
a new law creating organ. He argued that the new order thus created by a successful revolution,
which held effective away for 2 ½ years commanding submission and obedience from all quarters,
including the judiciary, gave birth to a new law creating authority de facto as well as de jure, and that
all legislative and administrative measures which flowed from this authority, were valid and immune
from any challenge in the Courts, where such a challenge is forbidden by the supra‑constitu*tional
powers of the new authority. In support of his argument, the learned Attorney‑General heavily relied
on a decision of this Court in the famous case of State v. Dosso, wherein, Chief Justice Muhammad
Munir, as he then was, by invoking Kelsen's theory of legal positivism, held that "where the
Constitution and national legal order under it is disrupted by an abrupt political change not within the
contemplation of the Constitution, then such a change is called a revolution and its legal effect is not
only the destruction of the existing constitution but also the validity of the national legal order.
Therefore, any change, no matter how or by whom brought about, whether by violence or
non‑violence or by persons held in a public position, is in law a revolution, if it annuls the constitution
and the annulment is effective. The legality of a successful revolution is judged not by reference to the
annulled constitution but by reference to its own success and the validity of the laws thereafter has to

be examined by reference to the new legal order and not the annulled constitution". The learned
Attorney*-General, who, ironically, was a counsel against the State In Dosso's case, admitted, with
refreshing frankness, that that case was decided without affording him a chance to contend against
the conclusions of the Court reached therein. He submitted that he wished that all the criticism now
hurled on the decision in Dosso's case had been made at that time or on some other occasion soon
thereafter to defeat it and that It was not challenged even in the causes that did arise in the superior
Courts thereafter, with the result that it is now woven into the fabric of our laws and that it is too late
in the day now after it has been allowed to hold the field for 13 years in public and political life, to
reverse it, this would only result in judicial chaos. He argued very forcefully that this Court has
undoubtedly got the powers to review that judgment, but that it should not review it, particularly at
this stage when the usurper has been supplanted and a duly elected and an accredited democratic
leader is in charge of the affairs of the country as the President and the Chief Martial Law
Administrator. To this last argument, the short argument given by the learned counsel of the
appellants was that the legality and legitimacy of the present regime is not in issue in these
proceedings, although they stated that it was a painful anomaly that the present head of the State,
who undoubtedly represents the body politic in his own right as the chosen leader of the largest
political party in this wing of the country, should have, under the stress of circumstances, derived his
authority not from the body politic, which he represents, but from the erstwhile Chief Martial Lam
Administrator, who has stated an exit. It is indeed most gratifying that this anomaly alluded to by the
learned counsel has now come to an end.

The pivotal question that arises for determination in these appeals is whether Martial Law Regulation
No. 78 under which the two detenus have been held, is valid law, and whether, as held by the learned
Single Judge of the Lahore High Court, in dismissing the writ petition on behalf of the detenu Malik
Ghulam Jilani, the Jurisdiction of Courts (Removal of Doubts) Order of 1969 (President's Order No. 3
of 1969) bars the jurisdiction of the Courts, including the Supreme Court and the High Courts, as it
purports to do by its section 3, to examine the legality of the detenus detention under Martial Law
Regulation No. 78 mentioned above. Section 3 aforesaid is couched in sweeping terms of complete
ouster of jurisdiction, by stating that "No Court, Tribunal or other authority, including the Supreme
Court and a High Court, shall‑--

(a) receive or entertain any complaint, or other representa*tion whatsoever against in relation to the
exercise of any power of jurisdiction by any Special Military Court or Summary Military Court or any
Martial Law Authority or any person exercising powers or jurisdiction derived from Martial Law
authority ;

(b) call or permit to be called in question in any manner whatsoever any finding, sentence, order,
proceedings or other action of or before a Special Military Court or any Martial Law authority or any
person exercising power or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law authority;

(c) issue or make any writ, order, notice or other process whatsoever to or against or in relation to the
exercise of any power or jurisdiction by a special Military Court or a Summary Military Court of any
Martial Law authority or any person exercising powers. or jurisdiction derived from a Martial Law
authority.

(2) Any decision given by his writ, order, notice or process issued or made or thing done in
contravention of clause (1), shall be of no effect.

(3) If any question arises as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the exercise of any powers or
jurisdiction by a special Military Court or a Summary Military Court or a Martial Law authority or any
other person deriving power from a Martial Law authority, it shall be referred to the Chief Martial Law
Adminis*trator, whose decision thereon shall be final.

Explanation.‑Martial Law authority means the Chief Martial Law Administrator and includes a Deputy
Chief Martial Law Administrator, a Zonal Martial Law Administrator, a Sub. Administrator of Martial
Law, or any person designated as such by any one of them.

(4) If any question arises as to the Interpretation of any Martial Law Regulation or a Martial Law
Order, it shall be referred to the Martial Law authority issuing the same for decision, and the decision
of such Martial Law authority shall be final and shall not be questioned is any Court, Tribunal or other
authority, including the Supreme Court, and a High Court. This order is issued by General Agha
Muhammad Yahya Khan, both as President and Chief Martial Law Administrator."

It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that this is a sub‑constitutional legislation,
being in the nature of a President's order and not one, which was Issued by the Chief Martial Law
Administrator in his supra constitutional powers. From its tenor and the context in which it was issued,
I am inclined to think that this order was promulgated by the Chief Martial Law Administrator in his
dual capacity as the President and .the Chief Martial Law Administrator, and that it was essentially and
primarily a Martial Law order made by the Chief Martial Law Administrator, to undo the judgment of
the Lahore High Court rendered in the case of Mir Hassan and others v. The State (P L D 1969 Lah.
786), the same day or a day earlier, wherein Martial Law Regulation No. 42 promulgated during the
pendency of the case before the High Court, was scrutinised, and it was held that it did not affect the
powers of the High Court under section 561‑A, Cr. P. C., which was (invoked to quash the proceedings
in that case. This judgment further sought to confine the Martial Law to certain limitations in relation
to the power of the High Court to dispense justice. Obviously, Order No. 3 was brought in to set this
judgment at naught and to place it beyond the reach of the civil Courts. Nonethe*less I am absolutely
clear in my mind that Order No. 3 of 1969, is wholly indefensible both on account of the illegitimacy of
its sources as well as the utter futility of its objective to defeat the judicial power legally and
constitutionally vested in the judicature of the country.

In my humble view, and I say so with all respect, the decision in Dosso's case relied on by the learned
Attorney-General which was based primarily on the Kelsonian theory mentioned above, did not lay
down the correct law, and cannot, therefore, prop up the illegal usurpation of power by General Yahya
Khan and his legislative or administrative actions. The theory propounded by Kelsen in its abstract
form is at best a theory which, instead of receiving a ready acceptance by the jurists, has met with a
large measure of opposition and rejection. The strongest objection, which is urged against it is that
the basic norm of effectiveness and success of the new order brought in by a revolution or a coup
d'etat can have no relevance in the sphere of domestic jurisdiction of the Municipal Courts of law,
although it is so recognised to the international law. Theories of law cannot take the place of law and
are not immutable. They cannot be made generally applicable to all societies at all times. In Pakistan,
in particular, we do not have to depend on Kelsen or other jurists or legal philosophers for
constitutional inspiration. Our grund‑norms are derived from our Islamic faith, which is not merely a
religion but is a way of life. These grund‑norms are unchangeable and are insepar*able from our
polity. These are epitomised in the Objectives Resolution passed by Constituent Assembly of Pakistan
on 7‑3‑1949, and were incorporated in the first Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan of
1956 and repeated again in the Constitution of 1962. Its basic postulates are that sovere*ignty
belongs to Allah Almighty, which is delegated to the people of Pakistan who have to exercise the stare
powers and authority through their chosen representative on the principle of democracy, freedom,
quality, tolerance, and social justice as enunciated by Islam, wherein the fundamental human rights
are to be respected and the independence of the judiciary is to be fully secured. Can it be argue that
any adventurer, who ray usurp control of the State power in Pakistan, can violate all these norms and
create a new norm of his own in derogation of the same? The State of Pakistan was created in
perpetuity based on Islamic ideology and has to be run and governed on all the basic norms of that
ideology, unless the body politic of Pakistan as a whole, God forbid, is re‑constituted on an un‑Islamic
pattern, which will, of course, mean total destruction of its original concept. The Objectives Resolution
is not just a conventional preface. It embodies the spirit and the fundamental norms of the
constitutional concept of Pakistan.

It was forcefully argued by Mr. Brohi that in deciding Dosso's case, their Lordships of the Supreme
Court had assumed that the powers of the Court flowed from the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order,
ignoring that the independent judicature in Pakistan, with the Supreme Court at its apex, is an
indispensable link in the structure of Pakistan as a political entity. Here the Courts do not drive their
powers from any individual, who may happen to have the control of the executive power for the time
being. This judicial power as a trust from the Almighty Allah, is lodged in the society as a whole,
which, in turn, is irrevocably committed to the Courts as trustees of the society. The decision in
Dosso's case appears to be controlled by the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order of 1958, which the
Court was itself called upon to legitimize as a new law‑creating organ. The Court did not go into the
question of the constitu*tional validity of that Order in all its details.

It was also argued by the learned counsel for the appellants that whether a revolution or a coup d'etat
has been successfully achieved or not, is a justiciable issue, which is for the Courts to decide on
evidence and relevant material, but the learned Judges, in deciding Dosso's case, proceeded to accept
the mere proclama*tion by the usurper as proof of the accomplishment and success of the revolution.
It was further submitted that Kelsen's theory that a successful revolution furnishings its own
gaund‑norm, is devoid of all ethical and moral fibre. Fieldson, A. J. A., in this judgment in the famous
constitutional case of Rhodesia entitled Madzimbamuto v. Lardner Burke (1968 All E R 561), observed
as follows:‑

"Nothing can encourage instability more, than for any Saila revolutionary movement to know that if it
succeeds in snatching power, it will be entitled to complete support of the pre-existing judiciary in the
judicial capacity.

The weighty arguments against the correctness of the decision in Dosso's case have not been
adequately countered by the learned Attorney‑General. The mainstay of that decision, as already
stated above, is the doubtful Kelsonian theory of legal positivism, which receives an indifferent
support from some passages cited by the learned Attorney‑General from Herald, J. Laski's book on
"State, in Theory and Practice', from Garner's "Treatise on Political Science and Government", and G.
C. Field's "Lectures on Political Theory". In fact, reading them in their true context, the' passages cited
by the learned Attorney‑General from the books mentioned above, do not support the theory in the
terms as advanced by him. In this view of the matter, I feel constrained to state, with all, respect, that
Dosso's case does not lay down the correct law.

The contention of the learned Attorney‑General that the decision in Dosso's case having held the field
for a number of years, must not now be reversed on the principle of stare decisis, as it would lead to
chaos, does not rest on a sound footing. This rule of stare decisis is one of expediency and can have
no claim to inflexibility or compulsive obedience. In case of constitutional decisions, this doctrine is to
be strictly considered, so that the organic law of the land is not allowed to run in muddy channels. The
error in a constitutional decision, which is manifestly apparent and which causes injury to the body
politic, must unhesitatingly be set right.

On the point of acquiescence and obedience of all concerned to the acts of usurpation by General
Yahya Khan and the submissive acceptance of the acts of his regime as constituting an estoppel, it
would be useful to refer to Coolay's observation in his book entitled "Constitutional Limitation" at page
104:‑

"Acquiescence for no length of time can legalise a clear usurpation of power where the people have
plainly expressed their will in the constitution and upon the judicial tribunals to enforce it. A power is
frequently yielded to, merely because it is claimed and it may be exercised for a long period in
violation of the constitutional prohibition without the mischief which the constitution was designed to
guard against appearing or without any one being sufficiently interested in the subject to raise the
question, but these circumstances cannot be altered to sanction the infraction of the constitution."

The learned Attorney‑General very forcefully argued that the reversal of Dosso’s decision at this stage,
which may lead to the striking down of the laws and acts of the Yahya regime on the principle of
legitimacy, will create a legal chaos. The Courts will not certainly be a party to creating a chaos in the
body politic, and equally well they abhor any vacuum in the law. It is precisely to save this situation
that the Courts are inclined to accord validation within recognised limits on the principle of efficacy, to
the acts of a de facto usurper of power by invoking the doctrine of necessity or implied mandate from
the lawful authority. Mr. Manzur Qadir very correctly pointed out that the doctrine of necessity has
now come to be recognised as a law of Pakistan. The Federal Court of Pakistan in Governor‑General's
Reference No. 1 of 1955, invoked this doctrine by resort to the famous maxim of salus populi est
suprema lex. This doctrine was succinetly explained by Fieldson, A. J. A. in the Rhodesian case,
referred to above, in the following words, which may be usefully quoted;--

"The necessity relied on in the present case is the need to avoid the vacuum, which would result from
a refusal to give validity to the acts and legislation of the present authorities in continuing to provide
for the every‑day requirements of the inhabitants of Rhodesia over a period of 2 years. If such acts
were to be without validity, there will be no effective means of providing money for the hospitals, the
police or the Courts, of making essential by‑laws for new townships or of safeguarding the country and
its people In any emergency, which might occur, and numerous matters which require attention in the
complex and modern State. Without constant attention to such matters, the whole machinery of the
adminis*tration would break down to be replaced by chaos, and the welfare of the inhabitants of all
races would be grievously affected."

Lord Pearson, in his dissenting judgment fn the same case in the Privy Council, agreed with the views
of Fieldson, A. J. A., and held that "on the doctrine of necessity, acts done by usurpers in effective
control of authority may be recognised as valid and may be acted upon in the Courts but within set
limitations". These limits were stated by him to be:‑

(1) That the acts be directed and reasonably required for the orderly running of the State.

(2) That they do not impair the rights of the citizens under the lawful constitution.

(3) That they do not entrench the usurper in his power.

I feel persuaded to agree with these limitations as laid down by Lord Pearson. By and large, they
provide a correct guideline for the Courts to examine the validity of the legislative or administrative
acts of the usurper when they are brought in for their scrutiny. I would, however, like to add that the
authentic verdict of the body politic cannot be turned down even if it happens to have been obtained
by an unauthorised person.

It remains to consider whether the two impugned measures its these appeals, namely, President's
Order No. 3 of 1969, and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971, which have proceeded from an
illegitimate source, can be upheld on the doctrine of necessity or implied mandate. My answer
definitely is No. It is the exclusive privilege of the Courts to identify laws from what are not laws or
bad laws. A law is not law merely because it bears that label. It becomes law only if it satisfies the
basic norms of the legal system of the country and receives the stamp of validity from the Law Courts.
On this test alone, Order No. 3 of 1969 must be struck down, as it seeks to destroy the judicial power
which vests inherently and constitutionally in the judicature of the country, which with the executive
and the Legislature, form the three important limbs of the State. The totality of judicial powers resides
in the judicature of Pakistan, whose powers for dispensation of justice as the trustee of the society,
are indestructible, and cannot be taken away by the arbitrary will of an individual. To the judiciary is
committed the duty of being the watch‑dog of the actions and virtues of the other co‑ordinate limbs of
the State. This Court has plenary judicial power, and the contents of that power cannot be shared with
any other 'limb of the Government, executive or Legislature. While the jurisdiction of superior Courts
may be regulated by the Constitution, any effort to destroy the judicial power is a senseless exercise.
It was once very, appropriately remarked by Justice Hughee that "there is no doubt that the Judges
are under the constitution but the constitution is what the Judges say it is". The absurdity of Order No.
3 of 1969 is heightened by its presumptuous effort to lay down that no Court, including the Supreme
Court and the High Court, shall even receive or entertain any complaint, petition or applica*tion or
other representation whatsoever against or in relation to the exercise of any power or jurisdiction by
any special Military Court or Summary Military Court or any Martial Law authority or any person
exercising the authority or jurisdiction from Martial Law authority. It can never be disputed that the
Courts alone have the power to determine all questions of their own jurisdiction, including the
negative that they do not have the jurisdiction.

In view of what has been said above, I would unhesita*tingly strike down Order No. 3 of 1969 as a
bad and untenable measure. In regard to Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971, I have simply to

point out that it can have no validity in the eyes of law, firstly, because its authorship is
unconstitutional being of a person who was a usurper and who had illegally arrogated to himself the
powers of the Chief Martial Law Administrator to issue this regulation. It can also not be upheld on the
doctrine of necessity or implied mandate, as there was, in fact, no need for it whatsoever, and it was
enacted to give a free band to the usurper to gag any one who raised a voice against him, and to
annihilate any opposition or supposed opposition to the firm entrenchment of his authority as a
usurper, The object of preventive detention, for which this regulation was made, is already available in
the existing law, namely, "The security of Pakistan Act, 1952 " and "The Defence of Pakistan Rules,
1965". It is obvious that this Regulation was enacted merely to make arbitrary power more arbitrary.

I think I must now summarise my conclusion in these appeals as follows;--

(1) The decision of this Court in Dosso's case does not lay down good law, and must be overruled.

(2) The Martial Law as proclaimed by General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan was illegal. The
assumption of power by General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan as the President and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator was wholly unconstitutional, and cannot be recognised as valid.

(3) General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan was no doubt in effective control of governmental power for
the period that he remained in the saddle, and only those of his legislative and administrative acts can
be recognised by the Courts, which may be found to be absolutely necessary on the doctrine of
necessity within the limitations of that doctrine to be adjudged by the Courts.

(4) President's Order No. 3 of 1969 and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 of 1971, not being valid laws,
cannot be recognised as such by the Court, and have to be struck down.

In the result, I would accept these two appeals, and direct that the detenus be set at liberty forthwith,
unless they arc detained under any other valid law of the land.

WAHEEDUDDIN AHMAD, J.‑I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of my Lord the Chief
Justice. I fully agree with its reasoning and conclusions and have nothing to add.

SALAHUDDIN AHMED, J.‑I have had the benefit of perus*ing 'the erudite judgment of my Lord the
Chief Justice, and I fully agree with him. I should however, like to add a few observations of my own.

Both the detention orders have been passed under Martial Law Regulation No. 78, promulgated on
17‑4‑1971, by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, and the main question for consideration before
this Court is whether the detention of the two detenus under Martial Law Regulation No. 78 is legal. All
other questions revolve round this.

Before, however, the Court can determine this question, it is confronted with the preliminary question,
as to whether the Court can receive or entertain any complaint, petition, application, etc., against or
relating to an order passed by a Martial Law Authority call or permit to be called in question etc., any
order of such authority in view of the bar placed on the Courts under section 3 of the President's
Order No. 3 of 1969. Two sub‑questions flow from this preliminary question, and they are;

(i) Is President's Order No. 3 of 1969 binding in law ?

(ii) If so, does it still permit the Court to enquire into the validity of Martial Law Regulation No. 78 ?

It has been the Constitutional practice in the Indo‑Pakistan sub‑continent that whenever an existing
Order ceased to be operative, either legally or illegally, the existing laws have been continued to
remain valid by the new dispensation. Beginning from the Government of India Act (Consolidated in
1924) down to the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1958, and the Proclamation of Martial Law by
General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, the validity of existing laws were continued by this process.
The details are as follows:----

Section 30 of the Government of India Act, 1919 (Con*solidated in 1924); section 292 of the
Government of India Act, 1935; section 18 of the Indian Independence Act, 1947; Articles 221 and
224 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1956; Paragraph 4 of the Laws (Continuance in
Force) Order, 1958; Article 225 of the Constitution of Pakistan, 1962; and paragraph 5 of the
Proclamation of Martial Law dated the 25th March 1969. Similar is the provision in Article 372 of the
Indian Constitution.

On the 20th of December 1971, Chief Martial Law Adminis*trator and ex‑President of Pakistan General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan stepped down from his offices, and consequently all the existing laws
lapsed, and unless they were saved by a competent authority under the subsequent dispensation,
they ceased to have any sanction behind them. The 1962‑Constitution having already been abrogated
by him, the only sanction behind the various `Laws' that he purported to make was his individual 'will'
and with his disappearance from the scene. all the existing `Laws' including President's Order No. 3 of
1969 and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 lapsed. There is nothing to show, and the learned
Attorney‑General has been unable to place before us anything from the now dispensation to show,
that the existing laws were saved. He has, however, relied upon the proclama*tion of General Agha
Muhammad Yahya Khan dated the 20th December 1971, whereby he transferred power to President
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto for the purpose of showing that the existing laws were continued in force. In this
Proclamation it has been stated that the Proclamation of the 25th March 1969 shall have effect subject
to the Proclamation of the 20th December 1971, and inasmuch as the Proclamation of the 25th March
1969 had saved the existing laws, the Proclamation of the 20th Decem*ber 1971, it has been
contended, also operated to save the existing laws. It is to be noticed that the Proclamation of the
20th December 1971, itself was by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan and it derived its force and
validity from his individual 'will'. As soon as, however, this 'will' ceased to exist on account of his exit,
the very life line of the Proclamation of 20th Decem*ber 1971, was cut off, I have, therefore, no
hesitation in saying that neither President's Order No. 3 of 1969 nor Martial Law Regulation No. 78 is a
valid existing law.

The next question is : whether President's Order No. 3 and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 can be
saved on the doctrine of necessity. The doctrine of necessity is concomitant of the doctrine of
legitimacy, and might have relevance in the regime of General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan. As the
legality of the present regime is not directly in issue before this Court, it is not called upon to consider
it. The learned Attorney‑General has submitted that the recipient of power in the present regime has
legitimate credentials from the body politic itself and therefore, no limits can be placed on its power.
As for the former, it is not before us as a specific issue; as for the latter it is not true. The corner stone
of the State of Pakistan is that the sovereignty rests with Allah and Pakistan is his delegatee in the
matter of the Governance of the State. It is natural, therefore, that the delegatee or for the matter of
that any ruler, single or collective, in Pakistan can never have unlimited power. If the present regime
has legitimate credentials, as claimed by the learned Attorney-*General the application of the doctrine
of necessity does not arise. It must rely on its own source of law. If it has not the validity of
President's Order No. 3 and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 shall have to be tested in the light of the

following tests which Fieldsand, J. laid down in the Rhodesian case and which were approved in the
Privy Council by Lord Pearce (1968) 3 A E R 561. If the taking over by the usurper is complete and
effective and this 9s to be determined on evidence by the Court, the Court may as a matter of
necessity treat a 'Law' as valid but only such parts as:

(a) are directed to and reasonably required for orderly running of the State;

(b) Such as do not impair the rights of the citizens under the previous lawful Constitution;

(c) Such as do not run counter to the previous lawful Consti*tution, and are not intended to
strengthen the usurper.

President's Order No. 3 is bad for another reason; It is Inconsistent with the Rule of Law which is the
basis of every civilised society. The order is inconsistent with the Rule of Law because it reflected the
individual dominant `will' of one person, namely, General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan and was
based on no rule of conduct and also because it sought to make an Act or Order of any Martial Law
Authority immune from attack in any Court of law.

Martial Law Regulation No. 78 is also repugnant to Islamic Law. The latter recognises detention as
justified in two circum*stances only, (i) by sentence of Court; and (ii) for the purpose of investigation.
Vide p. 35 of Miras‑e‑Quaid‑e‑Azam by Dr. Javaid Iqbal.

President's Order No. 3 of 1969 has also been assailed on another ground. It has been contended that
President's Order No. 3 contains supra-Constitutional Provisions namely, those barring the jurisdiction
of the Court In regard to Act or Order of a Martial Law Authority and that any dispute in regard to the
interpretation or application of a Martial Law Authority can only be referred to the Chief Martial Law
Administrator for final interpretation. These supra‑Constitutional provisions under the Provisional
Constitution Order, 1969 could only be made by the Chief Martial Law Administrator and not the
President who made President's Order No. 3. Tao two offices are separate and the former is superior
to the latter as the office of the President was created by the Chief Martial Law Administrator under
section 3(2) of the Provisional Constitution Order. This again is a question which the Court has to
determine for it is the only limb of the State that can determine it. The learned Attorney‑General has
unsuccessfully tried to repel this and argued that the aforesaid two provisions are Constitutional
matters and these could under section 8 of the Provisional Constitution Order be made by the
President. Inter alia, section 2 of the Order which says that "this Order shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in the Provisional Constitution Order . . . . .", and sections 3(3)
and 4 of the Order that give Martial Law Autho*rity the sole jurisdiction to determine the correctness,
legality or propriety of the exercise of any powers or jurisdiction by among others, a Martial Law
Authority or to interpret any Martial Law Regulation or Martial Law Order, clearly show that President's
Order No. 3, do contain supra‑Constitutional provi*sions. Alternatively the learned Attorney‑General
has contended, that President's Order No. 3 of 1969 has been promulgated by the Chief Martial Law
Authority and not by the President.

It has been submitted that the criteria for determining this question are three‑fold. Firstly, the title or
name of the Order ; secondly, description of the order and its authorship as given in the official
Gazette, and thirdly, in the recital of the power in the Order. In regard to the first test, prima facie, it
is a President's Order being President's Order No. 3 of 1969. The second test also shows that the
order has been described as President's Order in the Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, dated June
30, 1969. The Notification published in the Gazette contains the following;----

"The following Order made by the President is hereby published for general information:‑"

As regards the third test, it has been stated in the preamble of the President's Order No. 3, that the
Order is being made "by the President and Chief Martial Law Administrator." The learned
Attorney‑General has contended that the were addition of the description "Chief Martial Law
Administrator" does not make it the Order of the Chief Martial Law Administrator. I think the said
Notification clinches the issue for it leaves no room for doubt about the authorship of the Order. I,
therefore, hold that President's Order No. 3 of 1969 is ultra vires on this ground.

In this context it has been brought to the notice of the Court that by the insertion of the condition "for
the administra*tion of the affairs of the State" in section 8 of the Provisional Constitution Order of
1969 President's Order No. 3, has been made justiciable and the Court accordingly can determine
whether the provision contained in the President's Older No. 3, has in fact been made for the
administration of the affairs of the State. I agree with this contention.

The position as it obtains vis‑a‑vis the President's Order No. 3, and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 is
that there is a regime whose legality or legitimacy has not yet been questioned in any Court of law.
This regime has chosen to act under a law that has ceased to exist with the disappearance of the
maker of the law. What then is the consequence of such Act? In my opinion if the particular law has
not been adopted or continued in a competent manner by the new dispensation, the Act is a nullity.

I see no force In the contention advanced by the learned Attorney‑General that President's Order No.
3, has been re*cognised as good law in Fazal Ahmed v. The Sate (P L D 1970 Lah. 741) and in Fazal
Ahmed v. The State (1970 S C M R 650). In the first place both these cases were decided at a time
when the old order was in existence. In the second place in none of these cases any specific issue was
raised in regard to the validity of President's Order No. 3.

Assuming, however, the President's Order No. 3, and Martial Law Regulation No. 78 are still good laws,
the question is whether this Court has the power to determine the legality of the detention of the
petitioner's husband in view of the bar contained In President's Order No. 3 of 1969.

In my opinion this Court has the power to decide the issue as It is the sole Judge of its own
jurisdiction including the negative, to hold that it has no jurisdiction. This proposition arises from the
fact that being the highest Court of the land, the law declared by it is binding on all Courts and all
Executive and Judicial Authorities throughout Pakistan, shall act in aid of the Supreme Court (viz.
Article 64 of the 1962‑Constitution). No doubt the 1962‑Constitution contains certain provisions
ousting the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, the ouster, however, does not take away the jurisdiction
of the Court in regard to this particular point in issue. Reference has been made to the 1962
*Constitution, because that is the only legal instrument under which the institution of the Supreme
Court was established. A pertinent question, however, arises as to whether after the abrogation of the
1962‑Constitution by General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan by his proclamation of the 25th March.
1969, this Court can still derive inspiration and authority from the said y Constitution. The one short
answer to this is that as soon as `' General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan made his exit from the
scene, the Constitution, which had been dormant in the meantime, revived.

As regards the Judicial power of this Court it may be stated that the 1962‑Constitution was based on a
Presidential structure and it was accordingly erected on the theory of the separation of powers
between the three limbs of the Government, namely, the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary
The entire judicial power, including the concept of jurisdiction, was lodged with the judiciary. The
Supreme Court is the creation of 1962‑Constitu*tion and its existence was continued under paragraph
5 of the Proclamation of Martial Law dated the 25th March 1969. As the proclamation of the 25th
March 1969 and the Provisional Constitution Order, 1969, have ceased to exist due to the
disappearance of General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan from the scene, the 1962‑Constitution has
come back with full force and is operative until it is validly replaced by the elected representative of
the people. In Pakistan the legal sovereignty rests with Allah. Therefore, the judicial power has been
conferred on the judiciary as agent of the Sovereign Authority, namely, Allah. In my opinion,
therefore, this Court has the requisite power and jurisdiction to determine the questions that have
been raised before it. The existence of the jurisdiction of this Court receives further support from the
fact that the respondents have appeared before this Court and have submitted to the jurisdiction of
this Court. After all, in a civilised society who else can determine a dispute between the State or its

ruler and its citizens.

According to the common factor in the oaths of the Judges we have undertaken to discharge our
duties and perform our functions in accordance with the laws of Pakistan which we have sworn to
preserve, protect and defend. The oaths also have bound us to do justice according to law. This takes
us to the question as to what is law'. 'Law' has not been defined in the 1962.‑Constitution or in the
Provisional Constitution Order of 1969. It is, therefore, the function of this Court to define 'law'. It has
been rightly emphasized by Mr. Manzur Qadir that law its basic to orderly society and Courts are basic
to law. It can hardly be disputed that apart from the law as we find in the Constitution and the various
Statutes, there are a number of laws and legal principles which have been evolved by Courts in course
of their decisions. For example in Pakistan the rule of audi alteram partem is a part of the law of
Pakistan and it has to be read in a Statute which does not expressly oust the application of the
principle of natural justice. Besides, in any case where vires or validity of a law is in question, it is the
Court that has a final say in the matter. It has been truly said that 'law' is that which the Court
recognises as such.

It has, therefore, been rightly contended that now that the validity of President's Order No. 3 or
Martial Law Regulation No. 78 has been raised as a direct issue before this Court, it is the Court's
decision that will finally put a seal on its validity or otherwise.

The learned Attorney‑General has very frankly conceded that it is this Court that can put the final seal
on the validity or otherwise of a law. He has also frankly conceded that it is difficult for him to support
the provision of section 3(1)(a) of the President's Order No. 3 of 1969 which prohibits the Court from
receiving or entertaining any complaint etc. The Court's power to discover law applicable to a situation
has been accepted in the Governor‑General's Reference No. 1 of 1955 (P L D 1955 F C 435). In the
case under report the Governor‑General having found himself in a difficult situation and having been
unable to find any legal basis to meet the situation had to approach the then Federal Court for a
solution of the problem and the Court answered the reference and indicated the manner in which the
problem could be legally solved.

From the foregoing it is evident that, in the first place, President's Order No. 3 of 1969 and Martial
Law Regulation No. Its do not exist so far as this Court is concerned, and therefore, they are not valid
laws. In the second place even if it be assumed that they do exist, they can not deprive the Court of
its inherent jurisdiction to consider the validity or otherwise of those laws or any action taken
thereunder. The following illustration will highlight this position. Suppo*sing by an order passed under
Martial Law Regulation No. 78, 'X' has been ordered to be detained. While executing this order,
however, instead of 'X', 'Y' is arrested and detained. It is absurd to say that the Court is deprived of its
jurisdiction to consider the validity of the order vis‑a‑vis the person detained merely because the order
is by a Martial Law Authority. In the case of detenu Mr. Altaf Gauhar there is a similar question
involved, for, while the Martial Law Administrator Zone 'D' passed the order directing that the detenu
be kept confined by the Superintendent, Central Prison, Karachi, and granted Class 'B' during
detention, the detenu admittedly was not committed to the requisite custody. Can it be said with any
amount of reasonableness that the Court has no power even to see whether the action taken is in
accordance with the order passed by the Martial Law Administrator? It is now an admitted fact that
the detenu Altaf Gauhar was actually detained in places different from the one mentioned in the
impugned order of detention, without any order by the Martial Law Administrator concerned. Even on
this very limited ground I feel no hesitation in saying that this Court has the jurisdiction to pronounce
the detention of Mr. Altaf Gauhar as illegal.

It has been contended by the learned Attorney‑General that President's Order No. 3 has provided for a
remedy in a matter like this. I am unable to agree with him. Having regard to the provisions made in
section 3 of the President's Order No. 3 of 1969, any question regarding the correctness, legality or
propriety of exercise of any powers or jurisdiction of a Martial Law Authority could only be referred to
the Chief Martial Law Administrator for decision by a Martial Law Authority itself, for the Court's
jurisdiction even to receive or entertain any com*plaint in that respect has been sought to be ousted.
The position, therefore, is that any order passed by a Martial Law Authority, if it is labelled as such, it
must be accepted as a good order whether it is in fact male or could be made under any Martial Law
Order or Regulation, or not. Such an unlimited and un*defined power, which is at the same time
arbitrary and not governed by any rule of law, can never be accepted as good by any Court of law.
Such an unlimited power is not only foreign to Islamic Law but is also not recognised in any modern

society.

Dosso's case‑P L D 1968 S C 533

There have been murmurs both inside and outside Pakistan as to the correctness of the decision in
Dosso's case. It has now been mooted before this Court and the Court has been asked to review its
own decision. There is no doubt about the competence of this Court to review its own decision. Article
62 of the 1962.* Constitution, which established the Supreme Court, has provided as follows:

"The Supreme Court shall have power, subject to the provisions of any Act of the Central Legislature
and of any Rules made by the Supreme Court, to review any judgment pronounced or any order made
by it."

This case gives me the impression that law has been sacrificed on the alter of expediency. The entire
legal system of Pakistan has been derailed as a result of this decision, and the system requires to be
put back on the rail, if Pakistan Is to pursue its chartered course as laid down In the Objective
Resolution passed by the People of Pakistan. Stare decfsis should have no appli*cation to Dosso's
case. Schwartz in his book 'The Supreme Court' has observed as follows on stare decisis;

" . . In a judicial tribunal, stare decisis is not so much a virtue as a necessity . . . . . adherence to
precedent is basis as a abstract desideratum of the law. But it must not take precedence over the
need for the law to be right, particularly on Constitutional issues. Inherent in every system of law is
the antinomy between certainty and change." (pp. 345‑346).

I, therefore, fully agree that Dasso's case must be reviewed on the grounds mentioned by my Lord the
Chief Justice.

Dosso's case came up for decision during the regime of General Muhammad Ayub Khan and it was
decided therein that a successful revolution was entitled to the allegiance of the Courts of law. The
decision is based on what the learned Judges thought was Kelsen's Theory of Jurisprudence. This
theory was interpreted to provide the legal justification for the acceptance by the domestic Court of
the success of an internal revolution within the State. It was not borne in mind, as it should have
been, that Kelsen's was a 'pure theory of law' as distinguished from the 'law' itself. It is the
overlooking of this obvious position that has caused the basic fallacies in the judgment. Kelsen himself
was aware of the fact that this theory did not form part of any legal system. Furthermore the Court
had assumed that there was a revolution and the revolution had succeeded. Both these questions
were questions of fact and required to be decided upon evidence, and upon issues raised before the
Court. There is nothing to show, that there was any rebellion or insurrection. The Proclamation of the
7th October 1958, by President Iskandar Mirza made no mention of any rebellion or insurrection.

It is thus evident that the very foundations upon which the decision rested did not exist. I, therefore,
think that this Court should make it clear that the validity or otherwise of an existing order can only
be determined with reference to the laws of Pakistan and not to any theory of international
jurisprudence. It is also necessary to state firmly that the question of existence of a revolution or its
success are questions of fact which can only be decided upon evidence, and not assumed. This will
remove once for all the temptations that have been placed in the way of an adventurer seizing power
illegally and destroying an existing legal order.